# 01. Basic Building – AvaCon, Inc.

X

Flickr

Youtube

Mail

Rss

Welcome to AvaCon!  

# [01. Basic Building](https://www.avacon.org/blog/)

You are here:  [Home](https://www.avacon.org/blog)1   /  [Introduction to Building in Open Simulator](https://www.avacon.org/blog/introduction-to-building-in-open-simulator/)2   /   01. Basic Building  

## Basic Building

Building in OpenSimulator takes skill and practice, but every tree, building, piece of furniture, vehicle, and any other object begins with a simple “prim” or primitive shape. You might consider prims the “legos” of OpenSimulator.

This chapter will walk you through the skills you need to create your own objects in-world, from basic prim manipulation all the way to complex techniques. A few things to keep in mind as you get started:

Always make sure you are building on land with the landowners permission. Just because you technically **can **build doesn’t mean you **should.**

It is critically important that you always **NAME **your items, give the item proper **PERMISSIONS**, and take a copy to your inventory to **SAVE **your builds. You will learn how to perform these tasks in the tutorial, but just remember that failing to name, permission, and save your work can mean hours and hours of lost effort.

One of the best ways to learn how to become a great builder is by inspecting the builds of others. You can right click > Edit any object in the world to see how it was constructed!

### Topics in this chapter include:

Building: Introduction

Moving and Rotating a Prim

Resizing a Prim

Linking a Prim

Building: Playing with Shapes

Using Path Cut to Slice Prims

Hollow and Hollow Shape

Taper, Top Shear, and Dimple

Twisting Prims

Building: Additional Features (Parameters)

Flexi Prims

Adding Light

### **BUILDING: INTRODUCTION**

One of the most enjoyable things to do in OpenSimulator is to build your own environment. The interface building tools are available for everyone to use. Your creations can be saved, shared, modified and even bought and sold. Learning how to build can seem intimidating at first. Not to fear! Beginning with this chapter, you will learn – step by step.

Every object you see in OpenSimulator – from the common cube to the most amazing vehicle or building – has been built, or created, using tools that are available to you. In this mission, you will learn how to find a place to build and create basic shapes, called primitives, or prims for short.

**A Note about WHERE you can Build:**

Remember, you may build only in certain areas: 1. On land you own 2. On land owned by a group you belong to 3. On land owned by a person or group that has given you rights to build on their land 4. In Sandboxes – land set aside just for building.

### **Practice Building Skills**

**Step 1: Rezzing a prim**

The basic building block in OpenSimulator is called a prim, which is short for primitive. Creating, or making something appear, is known as rezzing.

To rez a prim, open the Build menu (CTRL+B depending upon your viewer). You will see your cursor turn into a wand. Click on the ground where you would like your prim to appear, or rez. By default, you will see a plywood cube appear.

**Try this now:** Rez a cube!Step 2: Rezzing other shapes using the Edit window 

 You are not limited to cubes. In fact, you can choose to rez several shapes to use in your building. When you created your first cube, you may have noticed a new window open on your screen. This is the Edit window. To rez a different shape, open the Build menu again (CTRL+B depending upon your viewer) and when the Edit window appears, select one of the other shapes you see. Then click on the ground with the wand. 

**Try this now:** Practice rezzing prims using the different shapes available to you.Step 3: Cleaning up after yourself 

 It is important to leave room for others to build. When you are through rezzing prims, right-click (Cmd- click) on each of your prims and choose More, and then Delete from the menu, or delete using the Delete key on your keyboard. 

It’s considered courteous to always clean up after yourself, so make sure to clean up your objects before you leave!

If you are using the  PRIMLAND  Tutorial game, stop here and continue on the path!

### Introduction to Building

Introduction to Building in Open Simulator0.1. What is OpenSimulator

0.2 Getting Started

01. Basic Building

02. Moving and Rotating a Prim

03. Resizing a Prim

04. Linking a Prim

05. Playing with Shapes

06. Using Path Cut to Slice Prims

07. Hollow and Hollow Shape

08. Taper, Top, Shear and Dimple

09. Twisting Prims

10. Additional Features

11. Flexi Prims

12. Adding Light

13. About Textures

14. Introduction to Texturing

15. Color and Transparency

16. Uploading and Applying A Texture16.1 Download Textures

17. Texture Repeats

18. Texture Offsets

19. Fixing Flicker

20. Advanced Texturing Techniques

21. Light and Shadow

22. Using Textures Wisely and Well

23. Scripting

### Interesting links

Here are some interesting links for you! Enjoy your stay :)  

### News

OpenSimulator Community Conference – Call for Proposals for OSCC23 – important dates

AvaCon to stream Virtual Ability Symposium on April 26th.

Join us at VWBPE!

OpenSimulator Community Conference 18 – Call for Proposals

5th Annual OpenSimulator Community Conference 2017

### Categories

Events

General News

Metaverse Cultural Series

Open Positions

OpenSimulator Community Conference

Top News

Uncategorized

Updates

### Site Admin

Log in

Entries feed

Comments feed

WordPress.org