# Bolstering the quality and integrity of online collaborative university- level courses via an Open Sim standalone server in conjunction with Sloodle - ResearchGate

Article PDF Available

# Bolstering the quality and integrity of online collaborative university- level courses via an Open Sim standalone server in conjunction with Sloodle

October 2014

Education and Information Technologies 21(5):1007-1032

DOI:[10.1007/s10639-014-9365-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-014-9365-1)Authors:[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[Aristotle University of Thessaloniki](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)

## [Download full-text PDF](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[Read full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[Download full-text PDF](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[Read full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[Download citation](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[ Read full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)[ Download citation](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)Abstract and Figures

The contemporary era provides several challenges which extend from the reconstitution of an innovative knowledge domain and curricula to candidate learning platforms that support online course delivery methods. Educators and scholars on these demands have recently started to rethink alternative ways for the assimilation of the experiential knowledge in three-dimensional (3D) technologically advanced environments, like 3D multi-user virtual worlds. In spite the widespread dissemination and proliferation of novel educational implications by utilizing online learning in 3D multi-user virtual worlds, the combination with the 2D interface of LMS (Learning Management Systems) and the assessment of the online course delivery method effectiveness for a long-term usability is still absent from the international academic literature. This study presents interoperability issues focused on the utilization of the virtual world Open Simulator (Open Sim) in conjunction with Sloodle (Simulation Linked Object Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) as a free plug-in module. The evaluation of this online process according to an empirical research method became possible with the assistance of ninety-five (95) students by four different academic sectors that participated in this project and measured the capabilities and instructional affordances of this platform. The evaluation process was focused on four multi-dimensional parameters (psychological-pedagogical, technical-operational, organizational-financial, and socio-cultural). The study findings based on students’ experiences revealed that both platforms could be sufficiently corroborated as a unique platform that increased learning outcomes. This “hybrid” platform can adequately convert the ordinary 3D multi-user virtual world of Open Sim and Sloodle in a common “incubator” of knowledge for online courses at university level. At the end, the instructional affordances and educational implications for future-driven directions in online settings are also discussed.[: Socio-demographic characteristics … ](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)[: Evaluation parameters reliability indices … ](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)[: Descriptive statistics for Technical-Operational parameters … ](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)[: Descriptive statistics for Organizational-Economical parameters … ](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)[+2](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)[: Descriptive statistics for Social-Cultural parameters … ](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Socio-demographic-characteristics_tbl1_266477466)Figures - uploaded by [Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)Author content All figure content in this area was uploaded by Nikolaos Pellas Content may be subject to copyright.  

**Discover the world's research**

25+ million members

160+ million publication pages

2.3+ billion citations

## [Join for free](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)Content uploaded by [Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nikolaos-Pellas)Author content All content in this area was uploaded by Nikolaos Pellas on Oct 07, 2014  Content may be subject to copyright.   1  The  present  paper  below is  an  original  authors’  working  draft  version  that  led  to  an  article  publication.  A reference in APA  settings  to  this study should always  be  done  using the following citation:  Pellas,  N.  (2014).  Bolstering  the  quality  and  integrity  of  online  collab orative  university- level courses  via  an Open  Sim standalone server in conjunction  with  Sloodle .  Education & Informatio n Technologies . DOI: 10.1007/s10639-014-9365-1 .  This  material  is  presented  to ensure  timely  dissemination  of scholarly and techn ical  study.  Copyright  and  all  rights  therein  are r etained  by  authors  or  by  other  copyright  holders. All persons copying this information  are expected to adhere to the  terms and  constraints invoked by each author's copyright. In most cases, these works may not be  reposted without the explicit permissi on of the copyright holder.  2  Bolstering the quality and integrity of  online collaborative university-  level courses via an Open Sim standalone server in  conjunction with  Sloodle  ABSTRACT  The  contemporary era  provides  several  challenges which  extend  from  the  reconstitution of  an innovative knowledge  domain and curricula  to candidate  learning platforms that  support  online  course  delivery methods.  Educators and  scholars on  these demands  have  recently  started to  rethink alternative ways  for the  assimilation of the e xperiential knowledge  in  three-dimensional (3 D) technologically  advanced environments,  like 3D  multi -user virtual  worlds.  In  spite  the  widespread  dissemination  and  proliferation  of  novel  educational  implications by utilizing online learning in 3D multi-user virtual worlds, the  combination with  the 2 D interface  of  LMS  (Learning Management  Systems)  and the  assessment  of  the  online  course delivery  method effectiveness for  a  long-term usability  is still  absent from  the  international academic  literature. This  study  presents interoperability  issues focus ed   on the  utilization of the virtual  world Open Simulator (Open Sim)  in conjunction with Sloodle  (Simulation  Linked  Object  Oriented  Dynamic  L earning  Environment)  as  a  free  plug-in  module.  The evaluation  of  this online  process  according to  an  empirical research  method  became possible  with  the assistance  of  ninety-five (95)  students  by four  different  academic  sectors that participated in thi s project and measured the capabilities and  instructional  affordances of  this platform.  The evaluation  process was fo cused on  four multi-dimensional  parameters (psychological -pedagogical, technical- operational, organization al -fi nancial, and  socio-cultural).  The  study  findings  based  on  students’  experiences  revealed  that  both  platforms  could be  sufficiently c orroborated  as a  unique  platform that  increased learning   outcomes . This  “hybrid” platform  can adequately  convert the  ordinary   3D  multi-user  virtual  world of Open  Sim and Sloodle  in a common “incubator”  of knowledge for online  courses at  university  leve l.  At  the en d,  the instructional affordances  and  educational  implications for  future-driven directions in online settings are als o discussed.  Keywords :  Open Sim; Sloodle; collaboration; onli ne learning; efficiency parameters  INTRODUCTION  The  online  cours e delivery  method  can  affect  the  users’  abilities  to  integrate several  advantages,  best  practices  and  benefits  of  the  traditional  learning  with  a  plethora  of  Web- based transactions to be utilized and  impact ed   positively students’ engagement  (Pellas,  2014b). Online  course delivery  method at  university-level proved  as an  eligible instructional  format, convening  the main  principles of a  collaborative learning  process between users   (instructor and  students) through  the  utilization of  Learning Management  Systems (LMS)  or  Virtual Learning Environments (Pellas & Kazanidis,  2013a).  The  emerging  innovations of  Web-based services  educational technologies  and mainly  Web 2. 0 support ed have  also caused  serious changes  in the  current educational  system.  However, they were not useful for insigh tful pedagogical implications, according  to the  3  demands o f a  wide  range  of  learning activities  including  design-based activ ities or  practice- based disciplines  (see Computer  Science, Engineering, etc.)  in  which students  need to  understand  the practi cal  consequences  of their a ctivities.  In  o ther  words,  the  trainees in  these  educational fields  need  a  unique  opportunity  to  collaborate  with  others  in  real  time,  design  or   co -create  significant  learning ma terials  by  taking  simultaneously  the  appropriate  feedback from  the  instructor  or  other peers.  Meanwhile,  not  only  the technical  capabilities  of  every  learning platform,  but  also  the  pedagogical-instructional methods  which  are  being  used  for studen ts’  participation  in  collaborati ve  educational p rocesses  are  to   some  extent  significant parameters that should be indentified furth er (Bonfield et al., 2012).  The technological  infrastructures of  the  traditional two-dimensional  (2D)  LMS supported  and  subsequent  developments  of  their  descendants,  i.e.  those  which  of  three-dimensional  (3D)  supported techn ology  and are  beyond  [Collaborative-] Vi rtual  Learning En vironments  ([C-] VLEs)  included  3D  multi-user  virtual worlds  (VWs),  have  seemed  that can  offer  several  advantages as the typical learning process  regards. 3D multi-user VWs have also  been  recognized as  [C- ] VLEs d ue to  “ the natural oc currence of  realness”  of an  interactive 3D  multi-user  grid,  in  which  spatially  distributed  (or  not)  users  as  avatars  (digital  alter-egos  of  humans ’  embodied represent ations),  recreate  moments  of  their  private  life,  exchange  opinions  and  communicate  with  various  forms  of  communication  (synchronously  and  asynchronous ly ).  Several factors that may affect the utilization of 3D m ulti-user VWs, in contract to 2D LMS  due to  educational inherent  capabilities to  be enhanc ed   practice-based tasks  and should  be  further indentified are the following :  (a)  The  organization  and  management  of  the  course  delivery  method :  LMS  give  the  opportunity  in  only one person t o  manipulate  specific  content  materials  which are mainly  documents and digital presentations. A 3D  multi-user VW allows each user to  co-manipulate  with other  peers  a  learning objective  without  limits or  distractions  in  online settings  and  of  course  with  no ph ysical  constraints.  The  o rganizational  and  managerial  responsibilities  are  very crucial  due to the  sense of  co-presence that  emerg ed  in 3D  places (grids).  This concept  is intermittently  envisioned  in the contexts  of a collaborati ve effort  based on the  users’  coexistence and persistence in virtual communities where  everyone can interact with others  and  see or  share  the  audio or  visual  representations.  Even if any user  removed from   the  world,  the envir onment  is  “live”  and  it  is availab le  for any  other  authorized  user. The  co - manipulation and  modification of  a  3D   pre-constructed virtual  place gradually  is growing  by  peers (sense of persistence), even if someone exits from it. Also, students are able to  navigate and  explore new  3D  visual transactions  that can  facilitate the  construction  of their  knowledge  domain.  As a  result,  there isn’ t  a  specific  way t o  adjust  or  replicate  either  the  instructor’s or  students’ theoretical prin ciples for  implementing the conte mporary socio - cultural theories, which are claimed that  the knowledge is  a  part of students’ socialization in  participatory learning activities.  (b)  The  a/-synchronous  communication  tools :  By  utilizing  LMS,  students  have  only  asynchronous communication with other users and this o pportunity is limited in text-writing  tools through  discussion  boards,  forums or  email lists,  and  thence  they cannot  construct  or  4  optimize their ideas easily at the same time and in the same place. In contrast, 3D multi-user  VWs  the  sense  of  co-presence  in  a  common  virtual  place  can  assist  them  to  eliminate  this  boundary with various  constructive tools that  they utilize, synthesize o r co-manipulate  artifacts as “objects - to - think with” via  various communication forms  either synchronous  (VoIP, IM, chat text) or asynchronous (gestures).  (c)  The feedb ack :  LMS  as 2D  systems  cannot  provide to users feedb ack  in real tim e  when  they  are  in  a c ommon  place  to  acknowledge  their  wrong  o r  correct  consequences  of  their  personal  activities,  but  only  in  one web page  where  everyone  is  able to see,  write  or  edit  anything.   A  3D multi-user virtual  world can provide feedback  to all users in  visual and audio  settings at the same time .  (d)  The  financial cost :  Many LMS  need  by   Institutes and  Universities to  handle their  content  material,  payment fees,  but  in  this  financial  crisis  period,  it  is  difficult  to  use  them  for  long  time term. As  a result  a 3D  multi-user VW in  a standalone mode  via one  (physical or virtual)  server has a  lower cost  and the co nstruction of learning materials  may provide students  the  availability  to  change  spatial  or  time  constraints  and  configure  their  pre-constructed  environment  according to  their demands  or needs.  In spite  that also  there are  emerging  Massive  Open  Online courses  (Moocs) sometimes  without payment  fee, their  usability in  collaborative settings, as students cannot be synchronized in a common place to learn  together  and  achieve  a  common  purpose.  This  situation  may  create  feelings o f  isolation  to  all users and creates a sense of disengagement .  (e)  The environ ment’s  adjustment : LMS  are  not appropriate  for  STEM  disciplines  (Science,  Technology, Engineering,  and Mathematics), especially  when courses  should be  taken in  computer laboratories or in  supplementary online settings v ia practice-based activities.  Students want  to  collaborate  in real  time  with  others, take  feedback  from  the instructor  or  other  peers  at the time  that the y  need,  co-create  or  design  artifacts  (often  in  conjunction  with 3D visual primitives) or evaluate technical sp ecifications of their projects .  According  to  the  afo rementioned,  many  scholars  and  educators  have  started  to  deliver  courses in  3D  multi-user  VWs. The  challenge  of enforcing  open  access educational  issues  in  these environments increase d  students’  engagement by  providing opportunities for co ntent  creation, decision-making or r eflection (Dickey, 200 5). However, 3D multi-user VWs  can  effectively support  collaborative  activities  that  may  boost the  development  of  thinking  and  cognitive  skills  (Leong,  2011;  Yu,  2009).  Educational  organizations  and  institutes  have  demonstrated a  substantial interest  by exploring  teaching and learning  affordances (Dickey,  2011; Wang  et  al., 2012)  or even  collaborative projects  to invest  students’ best  results  in e - training sessio ns (Brown  &  Green,  2009;  Mark  &  Mark,  2011;  Pellas,  2014a)  that  a  VW  can  offer.  Nowadays,  the  appearance  of  3D  persistent  open  source  and  multi-user  VWs  has  ma d e  many instructional  technologists to  consider them  as multi-user platf orms of 3D  server- based virtual  machines, or even  more as  descendants of  social VWs  (see Second  Life, Active  Worlds  etc.).  Open Simulator  (Open  Sim)  is  a  good  example  that  it’s being  used  for  educational technologists to simulate 3D virtual environments, because is precisely like  Second Life (SL). Even though, the core of the same communication protocol that SL can also  5  be  supported.  In this  notion,  users  are  engaged  in  the  learning  process  via  authentic (or  at  least pragmatic)  conditions by utilizing visual  tools or  artifacts in  collaborative activities that  the client  viewer  (a high-performance  3D  graphical user interface  for users to  communicate  and construct virtual places with others via various  communication channels) can replicate.  Although, sometimes students who do not have experiences in 3D multi-user VWs always  drop out  from those  courses due  to the  negative cognitive overload  which can  be appeared  during their  introduction. In  order to  overcome this  obstacle, a  growing  academic literature  body  (Kemp  et  al.,  2009;  Yasar  &  Adiguzel,  2010)  has  already  suggested  alternative  opportunities  for  interactive tasks by c ombining  Moodle  and SL, with the  Sloodle  (Second  Life and Moodle) free plug-in module. The utilization of open source systems, like Moodle or  Open Sim  through Sloodle  may facilitate  and examine  the fruitful execution  of online  collaborative  courses, while  online transferability  and interoperability  issues  need  further  investigation. Despite the interest that  is a limited through an  amount of case  studies with a  small sam ple to  explore  innovative  and alternative  learning  methods  by  utilizing only  some  technological services that Sloodle  provides, it is  also crucial to  find and measure  the  effectiveness of the learning process based on  a holistic evaluation framework with a n  empirical study and a larger voluntary sampl e of students.  While  the  implementation  of  innovative  pedagogical  practices  is  perhaps  an  imperative  issue for  e-Education, especial ly when  this can be  achieved by u sing 3D  technologically- advanced  environments;  it is  as well  as important  the assessment  of each  contemporary  approach  that  is usually  followed.  Therefore,  students  who  participate  and  practice  in  new  learning scenarios  for increasing  their technological  literacy must  start to  acknowledge  how  also socio-culturally and financially these educational processes may be influenced positively  by  innovative activities  via 3D virtual  learning environments.  A more holistic and multi- factorial  evaluation  method  is  needed  in  these  perspectives.  Without  using  a  more  descriptive  evaluation  model  that  would  relate  the  optimum  learning  process,  the  parameters that may determine the  effectiveness of 3D multi -user VWs in different learning  tasks are difficult t o be investigated. General ly, a holistic assessment  should cover four  parameters as  previously educators have  mentioned (Pfister et  al., 1999). In  co ntrast to   traditional  ways  o f  computer-supported  learning,  e.g.,  an  individual  using  a  personal  computer (PC) to navigate through a CD-based multimedia course, 3D multi-use r VWs on the  other  side  due  to  their  inherent  technological  infrastructure  endorsed  a  number  of  complexities needed to be measured (Holst & Hol mer 2000; Pfister et al., 1999).  In  this  vein, the  present  study  presents  interoperability  issues focused  on  the  utilization  of Open Si m combined  with Sloodle  in order to be  ex amined  acc ording to  95 students’  answers that p articipated in  this project and need ed to  answer questions  based on the  following  parameters:  (a)  Psychological-Pedagogical;  (b)  Technological-Operational;  (c)  Organizational-Economical and (d) Social-Cultural.   The  purpose of  the  current study  focused  on  the effectiveness  of  the  conjunction  between Open  Sim and  Sloodle as  a “hybrid”  platform via an evaluati on framework  for  implementing collab orative  online learning  activities in  Computer Science university-level  courses.  6  Background  TECHNOLOGICAL  AFFORDANCES  FOR  COLLABORATIVE  LEARNING  IN  3D  MULTI-USER  VIRTUAL WORLDS  ICT  (Information and  Communication  Technologies)  transactions and  services  in formal  or  informal instructional settings  which can  support collaborative  learning (CL)  approaches can  provide various  advantages.  CL  is a  learning  approach  that  emerged  through the  horizontal  interactions among users and the vertical interactions between users with the  system.  Recent studies (Lehtinen & Hakkarainen, 2001; Shih & Yang, 2008) have  shown that a  learning process may be come more effective  when it is being cr eated in a cooperative   climate  between  participants  in  order  to  achieve  a  common  goal.  Utterly,  this  case  can  be  discerned on the same level, when it can be acco mplished in VWs.  From 2009 onwards open source VWs (see Open Sim and Reaction Grid), were starting to  be introduced as candidate learning platforms. Some of the most distinguished features  that  can enhance this option for educational purposes are t he following:  • The  "persistence"  (i.e. a virtual world that continues to exist even after a user exits from  the world and these changes to its state are-to some  extent- permanent) (Koster, 2004).  • The  user’s embodiment representation , in which avatars are not passive viewer s of their  environments,  events  or  activities  in  a  common  virtual  space,  but  they  simultaneously  can  co -exist or co-construct a virtual community of  practices.  •  The lo w  or without fee performance of a  learning  activity  that depends in  Open  Sim  standalone  server.  In  contrary  to  SL,  users  in  3D  open  source  and  multi-user  VWs  have  no  payment fees to use concession rights of a virtual  environment or visual tools.  •  The  "backup"  implications  for  ensuring  and  restoring  each  user  tools  or   visual ar tifacts  with the “Secondary Inventory” in the server m ode.   The affordances  from  a vast  majority  of learning  processes depicted  by   the  utilization of  open  source  VWs  were  only  corresponding  to  lecture  events,  students’ engagement  or  co - construction with multiple visual artifacts and implementations of innovative socio-cognitive  pedagogical frameworks  (Berns et al.,  2013; P ellas et  al., 2013;  Pellas &  Kazanidis, 2013b,c).  The positive impact  of VWs in  students’ performances due  to the  common areas  of  learning  and the  phenomenon  of  co-presence,  i.e., the  co-existence  with  other teammates  was  also  approved from previ ous findings (De  Lucia et al. ,  2009;  Pellas, 2014b).  In this way,  any  observed inhibitions  of "frightened"  students  can be  eliminated, and  through  an interactive  relationship  between  other  avatars  in  which  action-based  learning  activities  produced  in  a  socially constructed knowledge field, this process  may offer positive attitudes .  Juxtaposing  to  the  above,  remarkably  little  research  was   done,  not  only  for  the  investigation  of the  service  level and  interoperability  issues, but  also  for the  functionality  and  efficiency  results  that  the  open  source  standalone  server  of   Open  Sim  can  provide  for  learning through  its  connection  with an  LMS.  The  aforementioned literature  review  leading  to a  crucial hypothesis  that aggregated  is:  if Open  Sim can  become  a  candidate platform  for  practice-based  tasks  in  conjunction  with  the  user-friendly  web-based  technologies  of   7  Moodle ? It is an urgent need to e valuate this procedure not only on its techn ological- functional capabilities that offer, but also it should be  better provided a more holistic  evaluation framework that assesses this pla tform according to students’ experiences.  OPEN  SIM  AND SLOODLE:  VALIDATION AND  INTEROPERABITY-BASED  OPTIMIZATION OF  THE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN  Open  Sim is  a  multi-user server-based  VW  or a  3D  multi-user distribut ed  virtual world  platform.  The  “open - ended” architecture   of  this  “world”  can be used as a social place for   various tasks, such as education, training, and visual prot otyping processes. It is pretty  remarkable to designate  the technological infrastructure of Open  Sim that  depicted through  the freeware open source server platf orm, working like the SL client.  The open code scripting language (OSSL) is almost the same as this o f SL (Linden Scripting  Language) in  which  users  have  also  a  private  land,  and  create  whatever  they want  without  restrictions. Indeed, each user has  access to the virtual world that was  created by th e  administrator.  Interoperability  issues  with  SL’s  protocols  have  been  recognized  since  2 007.   The legalization  (validation) of functionalities  that seeks  from the  Open Sim was  the highest  response of the syste m on students’ in teraction via communication  fo rms, which has  a  positive  effect  on the  cooperation between  distributed students  (Rico, 20 10;  Ryoo et  al.,  2011).  Open Sim  structural requirements pres ent a  visually interac tive and  multi -sensory 3D  server- based “wo rld” which  is  exclusively  accessible  only   to  authorized  users  and  influence  different learning activities  in a  positive way.  The most  prominent process is  the  standalone  mode . This mode is a single process, where users  can handle up the entire simply configured  simulation  of  a  server-based  3D  mul ti -user  virtual  world,  without  including  the  communication protocol  that  is  particularly the  same  as  this  of  Second Life.  Open Sim  uses  the SL’s  protocol for  the communication  between th e client  and the  server. Although  to  communicate users  synchronously  with  others,  they always  need  to  utilize  a  free  of charge  communication  protocols  by  Vivox 1   or  Freeswitch  voice  server  module 2 .  Indeed,  the  potential scale can be growing,  as the number of users grows  at an exponential rate,  according to:   (a) the overall atmosphere o f the class (emotion, motivation, presentation and  link to  the  original  objectives  of the  course),  (b)  the  possibility of  reaching  alternative  ways  for  one  or  more  disciplines,  aiming  to  optimize  the  student’s  performances,  (c)  the  treatment of primary learning experiences that can be used to  investigate their own without  inhibitions, but  with  the  instructor’s  proper  guidance and  feedback,  and  (d)  the  interaction  between digital natives (students) at the same time,  within Open Sim.  Another significant characteristic of Open Sim standalone server was the  protection to all  authorized users in which  they are free  to conduct and teleport  to other regions, for  collecting the data and in this dimension any other unauthorized user can be blocked (Figure  1) .  1   http://support.vivox.com/opensim/   2   http://opensimulator.org/wiki/Freeswitch_Module  8  Figure 1: The Open Sim software architectu re in a standalone mode  THE PROBLEM STATEMENT  Previous studies (Chaney et  al., 2009) have  penned to evaluate  the effectiveness of  fully  online  learning  programs,  but  they  have  not  provided  conclusions  on  ho w  to  exploit  them  further. Moreover,  the  above  study  pointed out  the  principles, in  which  the  relevant  evaluative procedures have  shortcomings and  gaps, which  were mainly  in methodology and  parameters  that  need  to  be  further  broadened.  The  main  deficiencies  regarding  the  evaluation methodology focused on:  (i) The investigation of the same well-known educatio nal sites and teaching approaches.  (ii)  The  reliability  of  assessment  tools  for  online  learning  programs,  particularly  in  terms  of  students’ assess in di fferent learning perfor mances according to their participation.  (iii)  The  ev aluation  of  students’  motivation  and  interests  based  on  the  technological  innovation may become the key difference by other c onventional teaching methods.  The evaluation  considered  as a  useful  and effective  tool  for  educators and  instructional  technologists of  education  and  training  system designers  that  can  analyze  and  improve the  quality of  the educational  process. As for the  o rientation of  the evaluative process, the  weakest points are focused on:  9  (a) The  asse ssment  of an   innovative  te chnological  infrastructure and  not the  educational  effectiveness of  an  online  program,  in which  users  can  identify problems,  prioritize  targets,  highlight opportunities, develop research effo rts, and finally  to evaluate the effectiveness of  the instructional design.  (b)  The  technological  requirements  of  the  users’  population  (personal  characteristics,  interests  and  needs,  etc.)  reveal  the  lack  of  a  specific  evaluation  framework  for  the  effectiveness of a learning process that should  be followed.  In the light of these findings, other parameters tha t involved in the teaching and learning  process  should  be  investigated,  because  their  identification  can  be  essential  for  the  evaluation  of  3D  technologically-advanced  environments  demanding  different  prepositions  before the  users’  introduction.  Additionally, to  obtain  the  equivalent reliability  of  the  evaluative  process,  users  (students  and  instructors)  should  firstly  try  to  utilize  the  environment  for  a  sufficient  period  of  time  in  order  to  acknowledge and  rev eal  the  advantages and disadvantages of their engage ment.  The purpose of this study by utilizing Open Si m and Moodle seeks to:  1. Enhance the quality  or  empower a variety  of teaching and learning processe s when this is  not possible with the traditional (face- to -face) in computer laboratori es.  2. Reduce the administrative burden of organizing and distribu ting knowledge resources that  may participants have  during a learning process,  endowing to the  support of the  memory of  an individual, allowing him/her to manage ti me more effectively.  3. Contribute through a  3D virtual environment to explore scientific  concepts, principles and  rules that can be determined in realistic or pragmatic conditions. The utilization of 3D  simulations in  well-structured didactic  conditions  can assist  students  can better  understand  their cognitive aspects during the learning pr ocess.  PARAMETERS FOR EVALUATING THE QUALI TY OF FULLY ONLINE PROCEDURES  The  attempt  of  evaluating  Open  Sim  takes  place  primarily  through  a  self-reported  questionnaire  (5-point  Likert  scale,  1=strongly  disagree  to  5=strongly  agree)  based  on  four  sub-scaled parameters (Pfister et al., 1999) tha t presented below:  A. Psychological-Pedagogical:  Includes criteria tha t  may affect educational  processes,  such as  different teaching  methodologies that  support  the acquaintance o f knowledge.  This  includes the appropriate computer-suppor ted collaborative learning (CSCL ) teaching and  psycho-pedagogical learning  principles  of  t he  knowledge’s  construction.  This  may  also  help  to choose instructors and educators the instructional strategy  that may bring the best  educational outcomes.  B. Technical-Operational:  Includes criteria of the technical requirements and services that  offered , like  interaction, navigation, and  user’s feedback  produced by the  environment. The  design and development of educational applications should follow a set of general principles  10  that  may  satisfy  some  individual  circumstances  related  to  the  functionality  an d  characteristics, such as:  (i)  The  main  management task   includes  the  administration and  control  of  various  forms  of information, flow control and navigation, and  prompt feedback in error cases.  (ii)  The  data  set  of  users’  concepts and   main  information  pre sented  in diff erent  forms,  depending on the strategy and pedagogical principles  applied every time.  (iii)  The  dynamic  interaction  among  users  with  the  visual  primitives  of  the  virtual  environment.  C. Organizational-Economical:   Encircle  topics, such  as  the  designed  system effectiveness  and as well as utility costs compared to traditional  teaching methods.  D. Social-Cultural:   Ev aluate the  application  that designed  to be incorporated  into  the  overall cultural and social development o f individual perspectives. The co ntemporary nature  of  e-Education  emanated  from  the  idea  of  the global   student  body  (e-twinning),  and  gains  great interest to  bridge the  differences that are  not achievable by  the conventional learning  methods.  THE RATIONALE  Until recently the  rapid growth o f Web 2.0  transactions has prevailed  as some innovative  e-learning environments  with  significant  challenges  for  users.  Rebmann  (2013) has  claimed  that the ories  relocat ed   literacy  as  a  multimodal, d ynamic  concept  have already  emerged  along with n ew ideas  about how  to design  contexts and  interventions that can  support  different aspects of learning.  The objective of  the combination between Sloodle  and Open Sim  can be  related into two  pillars:  (a)  The  creation  of  an  online  that  may  offer  “ mixed”  learning  experiences  operated  the  reliably both  advantages with  the conjunction  of a  modern  platform (Open  Sim), and  positive aspects  of  an  asynchronous LMS  (such  as  the file  repository,  the  forum and  course  material) and  (b)  The  technological  affordances of  Sloodle  as  an  open  source  software  package,  integrating the  Moodle  web-based  learning environment  and  the  3D virtual  world  platform  of Open Sim.  The current project initially seeks to combine th ese two platforms into a “hybrid” 3D/web  virtual learning environment.  The conjunction  of Sloodle with  Open Sim  can be  defined as  a  multi-factorial and  multi-functional open  source  project in  which  users develop,  share  primitives or  objects and  create  desirable tools  for supporting  education in  VWs  in order  to  “transfer” their  knowledge  domain  easier.  Certainly  there  were subsequent  efforts  to  support 3D o pen-source and multi-user VWs  in a  theoretical part (Bloomfield,  2011; Chen &  11  Su, 2011),  but it  has not  yet seen  a research  in order  to be  investigated the effe ctiveness of  the online course delivery method that Sloodle and Open  Sim as a unique platform can offer  for the enhancement of the learning process.  The rationale  behind the choice  for implementing learning  scenarios can sig nificantly  affect the  suitability  of  the project,  but  it  is still  needed  to  be  identified certain  parameters  affecting the participation  of users  in this environment.  The design of  a 3D  open source  and  multi-user VW initiated  from fundamental concepts of co ntemporary learning techniques or  models. These  parameters  can  contribute to  the  valid  affiliation of  3D open-source  VWs  by  innovative and interactive dimensions that can be  replicated.  THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY  The  intention  of  the  current  work  emphasizes  to  the  additional  parameters  that  are  necessary  for  the  effective  planning  university-level  courses  at  a  distance  by  utilizing  Open  Sim  and Sloodle.  Apart  from  these, an  empirical  research  method, acc ording  to students;  opinions was  deployed with also  a self-reported  questionnaire to measure  the final v alue of  e-learning programs.  The main  purpose  of the  current  study was  to  explore students’  perceptions/opinions in  practice-based  tasks  offered  in  online course  delivery  methods  through Slood le  and Open  Sim. More  specifically, this study  seeks to  present interoperability issues of  Open Sim  according  to  its  conjunction  with  Sloodle  as  a  unique platform ,  and  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness of this innovative process  with ninety-five (95)  students based on Pedagogical- Psychological  parameters,  Technical-Operational  parameters,  Organizational-Economical  parameters, and finally Social-Cultural parameters.   RESEARCH QUESTIONS  By designing and implementing  this evaluation, students  we re  able to determine their  experimental  views  in  online  learning  programs  implemented  through  Open  Sim  and  Sloodle. To achieve  the central purpose o f the research, it  was identified and  separated into  four hypothetical-inductive research questi ons (RQ):  RQ1) Can the utilization of Open Sim and Sloodle  provide the appropriate flexibility for  students to implement different learning approaches ?  RQ2)  Can  the technolog ical  infrastructure  and  operational  characteristics  of  Open  Sim  and  Sloodle  offer: (a)  the  dynamic  and  active  engagement of  users  in  the  teaching  and  learning  process in  order to enhance  their participation in  collaborative tasks?  (b) the  continuous  improvement of the  learning process helps  users to develop  and utilize adequately Open  Sim  with the Sloodle artifacts and tools in order to become  an alternative platform?  RQ3) Can the combination of Open Sim and Sloodle reduce the cost of e-learning courses at a  significantly less extent?  12  RQ4) Did  this  project  offer those  incentives  that may  give  extra meaning  and  significance in  the  learning  process  which  can  b e  inextricably  linked  with  students’  socio -cultural  characteristics (e.g. differences in gender or relig ious beliefs)?  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  SAMPLE AND DATA COLLECTION TOOL  The  data  gathered  from students  who  participated  in  the  winter  semester of  gradua te  and  postgraduate courses  at   four  academic sectors  who  were  enrolled from  Greece  and  Cyprus  in  the  period Oct ober  2012  until  the  end  of  December  2012,  according  to  the g eneral  12- week  calendar.  The  survey  questionnaire  sent  to  overall  students  of  this  pr oject  via  email,  resulting in 95 valid responses (from the o verall 125; response rate 76%).  The  utilization  of  both  platforms  as  a  unique  project  was  implemented  from  two  universities  in  order  to  complete  the  entire  online  projects  for  various  educational  disciplines  (e.g.  Industrial  informatics, Computer  Sciences,  and  Landscape  architectural  designing). The  instrument for extracting  the main results  administrated as  a self-report  questionnaire through  Moodle,  where instructors  shared  not  only  lectures, but  also  had  an  interrelation with the activities in Open Sim  (mainly for novice users).  The  current  co nstitution  is  an  attem pt  to  formalize  students’  ideas,  opinions  and  requirements, relating to the completed courses and operational characteristics of Open Sim  (Figure 2).  Figure 2: The conjunction of Sloodle and Open Sim  Also, for the reliability of the results, the statistical program SPSS (ver. 22) was used to  be  analyz ed  the quantitative data connection, c onfiguration, and search to create templates.  13  INSTRUMENTATION  For  this study,  the  urgent  need to  be  investigated the  quality  of online  processes h eld  in  Open  Sim  based  on  the  main  pillars  that  Pfister  et  al.  (1999)  have  proposed.  For  each  one  parameter  several  questions structured  to be  measured the  effectiveness of  Sloodle into  Open Sim  server-based grids. The  study  instrument composed of  overall 44 -item self-report  questionnaire  divided int o two  sections. Section  1 has 3-item  subscale for  demographics  about  students’  gender,  months  of usin g  3D  mu lti-user  virtual  worlds,  fields  of  study, and  their status (full or part-time). Section 2 has a 41-item subscale questions  by  the four  different parameters  included Likert-type  items, with  a response  scale ranging from  1  (strongly disagree)  to  5  (strongly  agree), and  other  3-open  ended questions.  Hence,  for  the  evaluation of this process it was used the follo wing parameters:  (i)  Psychological-Pedagogical  parameters  (a  11-item  Lik ert-scale  self-report  questionnaire): (a) interconnection wi th CSCL scenarios, (b) bidirectional com munication  between users, (c) utilizat ion of contemporary lear ning authorities (collabora tion, active  engagement, adaptability, co-construction of a kno wledge field).  (ii)  Technical-Operational  parameters (a  17-item  Likert-scale  self-report questionnaire):   (a) development  characteristics virtual  interfaces, (c)  users’  feedback; (d)  utilization of  Sloodle modules.  (iii)  Organizational-Econ omical  parameters  (a  5-item  Likert-scale  self-report  questionnaire): (a) state of flow management; and (b)  installation and operation.  (iv) Social-Cultural parameters (a 5-item Likert-s cale self- report questionnaire): users’  cultural characteristics;  (v)  Final  assessment  of  the learning experiences  for  further  uses (a 3 -item  open-ended  self-report questionnaire).  The  author  of  this stud y  contacted  online  with  instructors  or  supervisors  and  asked  fo r  permission  to conduct  with  students  who identically  study in  online  courses at  university  level. Acc ording  to their  approval a  recruiting letter  was posted and   a  link to  the online  survey  on  a  message  board.  The  instructors  also  encouraged  students  to  participate  in  the  project.  When  students  filled  out  this  project  and  the  online  consent  form  after  that,  they  were directed  to fill  out the  online survey  on their  email. The  entire questionnaire  was sent  via email  to participants  and the treatment  was ensured  their anonymity. Each  session took  no more than 15 – 20 minutes to be comple ted.  TREATMENT  In  the prominent  notion  of collabor ative  platforms f or  implementing CSCL  scenarios,  a  variety of collaborative projects were accomplished, regarding the needs of online processes  via  3D multi-user  virtual  worlds.  Online  sections were  followed  the 6 -week university  14  calendar, in the spring semester with a 2-hour weekly meeting in  two different virtual  computer laboratories.  The  entire  project c ompromised  of  seven  different  courses  by their length  to  vary  (2 - 3  days) and it lasted 40-minute for each course. The entire project took 10 teaching hours. The  objective  of  this  project  was  focused  on  how  sufficiently  and  collaboratively  can  be  structured and  organized  by  the same  students  as  learning content  developers,  a 3D  technologically-advanced  learning  environment  for  collaborative  online  scenarios.  Only  students from Informatics took place in this survey.  Students tried to construct virtual  facilities, kiosks of knowledge and completed with  their involvement gave more emphasis to  the  implementation  of realistic  collaborative design-based  activities through  collaborative  online  activities.  Students  before the main  project h ad  a  4 -hour  student-friendly  lesson  to  execute some  basic e-skills  that Open  Sim offers.  Previous exercises  were only  with Moodle  by exchanging ideas and opinions for their courses in  asynchronous settings.  The sample  that finally  participated in  this survey  should firstly  be carried  out constructs  in Open Sim and Sloodle. These are the following:  (a)  Developing,  designing,  advising  on  and  evaluating  tools  or  artifacts  (e.g.  by  constructing  PowerPoint  presentations  or  artifacts t o  connect  LMS  o r  Web  sources)  which  were i mplemented  by  the  same  students in  f ormal  or in formal c ollege-wide professi onal  development.  (b)  Producing,  editing  or  manipulating  training  materials b ased  on  Open Sim functional  characteristics to  assist or  run  training workshops  and in  particular migrating  learning  materials from other sources (see Moodle or  Blackboard).  Other five fundamental parameters for stud ents’ participation in this project were:  (i)   The  implementation of  the o nline sessions  that  followed a  20-week  university  calendar  (from  the  overall  25 -week  that  most  universities  had), both in winter and spring  semester (from October of 2011 until Ju ne of 2012).  (ii)   The utilization  of Open  Sim as  an alternative  platform in  order to complete the  entire online projects that finally implemented.  (iii)   Students need to collaborate at a  distance with other peers in  all sub-sections.  Specifically,  the heterogeneous  groups  of five  students  should  have implemented  specific  activities an d b esides  that  in  final p resentations,  students should  correspond  about their  decisions to  implement something,  each student  should  have his/her  responsibility for  a  specific task.  (iv)   Students have also  separated as groups  of five  members in order  to prepare a  short  report  that  assessed  the  pre- constructed  v irtual  environment.  Students’  formative  assessment was about  interactivity issues, visual  tools or primitives  and the  appropriate use  of  a  pre-constructed virtu al  environment for  collaborative  activities  by using  synchronous  and asynchronous forms  of communication (initial  assessment reports). These were not  really familiarized  neither with  the utilization  of Open Si m Scripting  Language (LSL), the  available ar tifacts  (materials  or virtual  objects nor  with tools  for scripting  and  texturing) .  However, by the instructor’s guidance they tri ed and succeeded to learn.   15  According to  what  has  already been  reported  in  the theoretical  part  of  this study,  it  can  be concluded  that  Open Sim  in  conjunction with  Sloodle  might be  a  beneficial  environment  for the educational community. The resul t of this evaluation by a suffici ent number of  trainees  who  in d ifferent  time  periods  and  in  different d isciplines  attended  to   this  project  has revealed some valuable conclusions for the  evaluation of its pedagogical value.  RESULTS  Students who participated in this project had  different cognitive backgrounds and they were  from  different  Informatics sectors  of  Greece  (32  male  and  23  female)  and  Cyprus  (20  male  and 20  female).  The evaluation of  educational  programs undertaken  by the  same  users and  brought some particularly intriguing resul ts that Table 1 shown:  Table 1: Socio-demographic characteristics  KIT  Mean a   SD   Graduate students  (%)  Postgraduate students  (%)  Overall (%)  N=95  22   2.04  87(86)  8 (14)  95   Male  21.7  2.02  76(80)  5(50)  81(76)  Female  22.5  2.05  11(20)  3(50)  14 (24)  a  The mean scores for the ages of the group that enrolled with the online course delivery method.  Table 2: Previous experiences with other platf orms  N  (%)  Fully online course delivery method  (%)  Graduate  students  (%)  Postgraduate  students  (%)  1. Prior online course  experience with LMS  1.1. No prior course of this  type  38  (30.4)  35  (36)  3  ( 60 )  1.2. Took previous course of  this type  57  (69.6)  55   (64)  2  ( 40 )  95  90   5  16  2. Personality traits from  the utilization of virtual  worlds  2.1. Neuroticism  18  (19)  16   (17.8)  2  (40)  2.2. Extraversion  17   (18)  15   (16.7)  2  ( 40 )  2.3. Openness to Experience  45   (47)  44   (46.5)  1  (20)  2.4.Conscientiousness  15  (16)  95   15   (16.8)  90   0  (0)  5  3. Web 2.0-based  applications that users have  an account  38   (40)  37   (39)  36   ( 40)   36   (40)  2  ( 40 )  1  (20)  3.1. Facebook  3.2. YouTube  3.3. MySpace  10   (10.5)  9  (10)  1  (20)  3.4. War of Warcraft (WoW)  3.5. Other Virtual Worlds  (Open Simulator, Active  8  (8.4)  8  (8.5)  0  (0)  17  Worlds etc.)  2  (2.6)  95   1  (0.1)  90   1  (20)  5  Table 3 b elow describes  findings for  the reliability analysis of  each section with the   Chronbach alpha ( a ). In all  tables, it  was also compared the  Mean indicators (Mean) and the  Standard  Dev iation  (SD) on  scores for  all quantity  variables, with  p<0.05  as  a  stat istically  significant correlation factor of the analysis .  Table 3 shows  that evaluation parameters  reliability  analysis  o f  Cronb ach’s  alpha has satisfying in ternal  consistency  at  medium  rates  (a>.70).  Table 3: Evaluation parameters reliability indic es  Evaluation parameters  N of  items  Cronbach’s alpha ( a )  Split-half reliability  Psychological- Pedagogical parameters  12    .78*   .76*  Interconnection with  CSCL scenarios  4  .78  .77  Prompt feedback:  Bidirectional  communication between  instructor and students  7  .76  .75  Technical-Operational  parameters  17   .79  .78  Developmental  characteristics  3  .78  .77  The graphical user  Interface (GUI)  2  .76  .76  Interaction and  Navigation  3  .82  .79  The user’s feedback   4  .83  .78  The utilization of Sloodle  modules  5  .85  .78  Organizational- Economical parameters  5  .79  .77  18  State flow management  2  .82  .74  Installation & Operation  3  .76  .73  Social-Cultural  parameters  5  .76  .76  Cultural characteristics of  "action groups"  3  .75  .73  Social issues of the  contemporary education  2  .79  .77  *Cronbach’s alpha  requires a reliability of .70 or higher to obtain on a sustainable sample.  * The entire questionnaire with the evaluation parameters for the effectiveness of Open Sim & Sloodle was  consisted of 39 items with a self-rating 5-score Likert scale (1=strongly agree to 5=strongly agree).  Consequently,  Table  4  shows  descriptive  results  from  the  Psychological-Pedagogical  parameters ( a =.78), according to their previous  experience in distance learning.  Table 4: Descriptive statistics for Psychological-Pedagog ical parameters  Questions for Psychological-Pedagogical parameters  N  Min Max  Mean  SD   Interconnection with CSCL scenarios  1. Can the active participation and interaction with the 3D  web-based system (Open Sim and Sloodle) promote your  personal learning strategies sufficiently?  95   3  5  4.24  1.47  2. Can Sloodle and Open Sim support the collaborative- constructive knowledge domain via multiple activities?  95   3 5   3.88  1.27  3. Did you engage and interact with other peers  adequately to implement CSCL project-based scenarios?  95   2 4   3.66  1.88  4. In university-level online courses:  (a) Did you disclose analysis, generalization and synthesis  skills?  95   3 5   3.93  1.43  (b) Do you think that the provided (e-) skills can be  transferred in real life settings (cognitive, verbal, or  mental skills)?  95   3  5  4.05  1.49  5. Did this unique platform give you more opportunities  for experimentation and further understanding of  concepts in the social-cognitive learning practices?  95   3 5   3.93  1.51  6. Did the learning process allow the storage of your  personal activities in the main database (creating a sense  of autonomy)?  95   3 5   3.93  1.65  7. Will you consider in the future this project as an  important reason to select it in order to reinforce the  conjunction between Sloodle with Open Sim for the  three-dimensional visualization of your data?  95   3 5   3.93  1.17  Prompt feedback: Bidirectional communication between instructor and students  8. Were you able to redefine and "transform" previous  activities based on the information you received  by  the  95   3 5   4.34  1.47  19  instructor?  9. Was the accessibility in digital learning sources (under  the instructor’s guidance) ease to gather the appropriate  information?  95   3 5   3.98  1.27  10. Did you consider any easy "asynchronous" mode of  communication offered by the system, through a BBS  (Bulletin Board Service), file sharing and inform members  of a group, to access in the learning material?  95   2 4   3.96  1.88  11. Did you find easy the "synchronous" mode of  communication offered via voice calling and texting at the  same time for collaboration between groups?  95   3 5   3.93  1.23  The  first  question  (RQ1)  investigates  whether  the  present  project  provides  an  alternative-learning framework for implementing innovative teaching methods based to  contemporary  learning  approaches. Acc ording  to re spondents’  answers  this seemed to be  true. In this case, the delimitation of the pedag ogical framework should be based on:  (i)   Flexibility an d open  access to  a plenary  of educati onal  activities tha t this  project  offered.  (ii)   Adaptability  courses  according  or  students’  needs  and  demands  in  online  collaborative courses.  (iii)   Interactivity and feedback that was  provided by other users, instructor  or even from  the system.  It  was  understood  through  the  adaptation  of c ontemporary  learning  principles  in  Open  Sim server the collaborative attributes via th e compatible adoption of Sloodle.  (i) For  the  implementation of  online learning  programs in  the  environment of  Open Sim,  it seeme d that  the  system allowed  users  to  cooperate and  communicate  together, in  order  to  build  a knowledge  field  in  collaborative  settings  and understand  it  better.  Regarding  the  successful learning  process design,  it  is also  important  to refer  the  connection with  Moodle  and the independent management o f cognitive resources that  can become an indispensable  tool in learners’  hands.  This could  better organize their wo rk in Moodle, and  then to  simulate 3D form in the environment of Open Si m.  (ii) The  students’ satis faction  lead educators  to understand  that Open  Sim can  be an  alternative platform for collaboration and group-base d activities improving to this notion the  development  teaching  process.  Also,  a  crucial  noteworthy  point  is  the  possibility  of  collecting and processing information from users and feed the database in various tools with  objects ("adaptability"  of the system)  considered as  necessary outcomes of  the learning  process (sense of autonomy).  (iii)  The  effective  management  of  3D  interactive  visual objects  and  artifacts  in  distance  courses  related  to  communication  between  users  ("horizontal"  relationship  governing  users), and the appropriate  feedback that received from the  system ("vertical" relationship).  A  positive  judgment  was  gained  from  students’  int eractions,  according  to  the  intra- communication  and  the  instructor’s  appropriate  feedback  was another  point  of  view.  The  20  compatibility of  different ways  to  communicate users  with  synchronous (bulletin  board, file  sharing, chat  text, voice call)  or asynchronous  communication (IM,  gestures )  tools appeared  that  could  meet the demands  and  expectations  of  all  users.  Users  of thi s  project  had  also  feedback  in  visual  and  acoustic  means  in  o rder  to  facilitate  the  interaction  between  them.  This is  a positive  issue and  supports each  student with his/her  personal problem-solving  strategies  (management  of  complex  interactions  that  acce pts-intrinsic  cognitive  load")  and  help them to collaborate and compromise signifi cant consequences  of  learning.  Thus, it  can  be  concluded  that a  long-term  use  of Open  Sim  can  rely on  the  pedagogical  framework which is flexibile within  the pedagogical principles associated with contemporary  CSCL approaches, in order to facilitate the users’ in teractions with the virtual environment.   Descriptive statistics  from Table  5  (Technical-Operational parameters) depicts  that  many  correspondents  abundantly  were sa tisfied  with  the  3D G UI  ( a =.79), an d  it  is  sure  that  the  control panel of Open Sim was not difficult to be c onfigured.  Table 5: Descriptive statistics for Technical-Operational  parameters  Questions for Technical-Operational parameters  N  Min Max  Mean  SD   Developmental characteristics  1. Did the virtual platform work fine in different  platforms (Windows XP, Vista, 7, Snow Leopard 10.6  or Linux)?  95   3 5   4.14  1.47  2. Did the virtual platform support multimedia  applications (images, audio, video, VRML files) t o  enhance the presentation of information?  95   3 5   3.98  1.27  3. Did you need to know some of the programming  languages (HTML, Java, C #) in order to become  familiar with the scripting language of the Open  Sim?  95   2 4   2.96  1.88  The graphical user Interface (GUI)  4. Was the realness of the 3D “window”  environment of Open Sim influenced your feedback,  between teammates and instructor during the  creation of artifacts?  95   3 5   3.93  1.23  5. Was it possible to select and handle objects that  every user could see them from "different  perspectives"?  95   3 5   3.93  1.73  Interaction and Navigation  6. Can students interact with the virtual platform  easily according the appropriate communication  tools that are available to transmit the information?  95   3 5   4.14  1.47  7. Did the system contain navigation buttons  (search, map and navigation buttons help),  supporting the use of different types of navigation  (for beginners or advanced users)?  95   3 5   3.98  1.27  21  The user’s feedback  9. Was the realness of the 3D “window”  environment influenced your feedback, both among  teammates and instructor, during the creation of  artifacts?  95   3 5   3.93  1.23  10. Was it possible to select and handle objects in  "different views or perspectives" and this option  helped you to investigate further the learning  materials?  95   3 5   3.93  1.23  11. Was easy for you to achieve the interaction with  other users in the visual or auditory field or through  body movements (gestures: interactions through  artificial animations or virtual tools for specific  functions), or even in combination of these (non- verbal communication)?  95   3 5   4.34  1.47  12. When you design activities, was the virtual  platform able provide to you the appropriate  feedback with visual or audio stimulus and facilitate  your interaction with other members?  95   3 5   3.98  1.27  The utilization of Sloodle modules  1. Were you available by using Web-Intercom to  interact more efficiently with other team members  and in this notion to facilitate the easy development  of educational activities via chat text?  95   3  5  3.45  1.25  2. Was the Multi-function toolbar essential for the  proper interaction and cooperation with other  members?  3. Did the Postcard blogger help you to show the  team’s activities by uploading photos and videos?   95   3 5   3.84  1.02  4. With Quiz chair and Quiz HUD, where you able  firstly to recognize visual objects and secondly to  answer all questions?  95   3 5   3.47  1.14  5. Did the gestures strengthen your personal  presence and communication with other  participants?  95   3 5   3.89  1.69  The  second  question  (RQ2)  related  on  whether  the  technological  infrastructure  and  operational characteristics of Open Sim that finall y offered the following:  (a) A dynamic and active involvement of users  in the teaching and learning process.  (b) The  continuous impr ovement  that  will s erve u sers  in the  development a nd  use of   virtual space or place for easier acquisition  of knowledge.  (c) In  this data  appeared that  the cost  of constructing a  learning environment  with Open  Sim  was less  cost efficient ,  something that  might further  affect  the overall  cost of   distance learning courses.  Some other  crucial  points  of v iew that  should  be  noticed are  the  adoption of  active  and  constructive-collaborative  learning approaches relat ed to  the efforts undertaken  by each  22  user in order to promote individual learning strategies, and ultimately proclaimed innovative  dimensions for the acquisition of knowledge.  With  the  students’ introduction  into  the  environment  of  Open  Sim  they have  the  possibility to choose multimedia tools and items that  may include in their personal e -profile.  This may  result in  the skillful  management of  the "positive  cognitive load"  that would  come  from the  lar ge nu mber  o f  interactive elements  that shipped  Open Sim,  and  c an b e used   during  the  course  (e.g.  primitives,  textures,  note  cards)  for  efficient  processing  and  organizing of matter.  Through this research, it was  also found that the active  involvement of students could be  achieved:  (a) At  the  first  level from  the  communication and  interaction  with their  instructor  (teaching process).  (b) Among the  collaboration of students  in a learning process with  the utilization  o f  (virtual) tools or gestures, visual and auditory field  was another standpoint very significan t.  This in turn  can act  as a catalyst  effect to  shift from instructor-centered model  of  lecturing  in  a  m ore  collaborative- supported.  Indeed,  adults’  e -skills,  determination  in  courses contributing even better in their acti ve involvement.  (c)  The  continuous  improvement  of  services  related  to  the  operational-technical  parameters have  included issues,  according to  the system’s requirements,  the design  of the  3D GUI, processes, support,  and management tools of  this platform. In particular,  the  growing characteristics are dealing  with the  criteria of 3D  multi-user VWs compatibility  with  various software systems (Windows XP/Vis ta/7, Snow Leopard 10.6, Linux).  The  key  issue  that  covers  the  environment’s   installation  in  various  platforms  remaining  also a  crucial points  of  view, like the  operating system’s design  characteristics, the design of  the environ ment which  includes criteria,  like design issu es of  interaction, navigation  and  user-feedback from  the  environment through  questions related  to  design issues  in  the user   interface. Particularly  integrity  issues  are  related  to  the  presentation screen  and  the  ability  to  use  multimedia elements  that  enhance  the  information (e.g.  management  of  3D  objects  and scripts), and the  rights or conditions of  the VW are easily  changeable. This may be  a key  selection criterion  of this  project.  This advantage  may provide  an  exploiting point  for  students wh o managed  to combine  theory their  theoretical parts  of study  with practice- based activities.  The  answer  directly  indicated  that  the  use  of  innovative  multimedia  data  could  contribute  to   a  better understanding  of course  content with out  distracting  students.  The  user  interface emulates  the  expandable  areas  ("Sims") and  information  that  is  going  to  the  same a ttractive  manner, creating  a pleasant  atmosphere for  learning,  so   as not  to cause  fatigue  and co nfusion to  the  user.  Also,  the  selection,  management and  use  of  objects  and  open code programs (scripts) by the mselves, yet in many other LMS p rograms are not  feasible. Similarly  for  the  user’s   navigation and  exploration  of  the  environment, the  system  enables users to navigate and search  in 3D multi-user VW through the  keyboard and mouse,  23  aiding a  better management  of the educa tional m aterial that  goes in  through Open Sim   (management of the  "external cognitive load"). The  navigation (or teleportation) and  search  that supports  Open  Sim  can be  considered  valuable to  reinforce  concepts  in a  virtual  space  (grid).  Table 6  for the  Organizational-Economical parameters  ( a =.79) affirms  that th e sys tem  provides enough assistance in different problems. In addition the system can be easily  installed in computer labs and personal computers of  users.  Table 6: Descriptive statistics for Organizational-Economical parameters  Questions for Organizational-Economical parameters  N  Min Max  Mean  SD   State flow management  1. Did the system provide the guaranteed services to  bolster students’ attention and motivation?   95   3   5  3.74  1.17  2. Have you ever reported any technical problems with  the supported system and if so was it able for instructors  to provide alternative solutions?  95   3   5  3.98  1.97  Installation & Operation  3. Was there any charging policy proportional for  participants to attend in the course and consequently  there was any restriction?  95   2 5   3.93  1.33  4. Can the system easily be combined with Moodle tools?  95   2 5   3.93  1.33  5. Can the system be installed on laptops /or personal  computers, which meet even the minimum requirements  of Open Sim?  95   2  5  3.93  1.33  Another direction  that the  current study  attended was  the need  to determine  the  economic  impact  that  the  students’  relation  would  have  various  forms  of  assistance  that  a  3D multi-user VW can offer. A key question (RQ3) was whether this  process in Open Sim and  Sloodle  can affect  the  cost o f implementing  distance  courses at  a  significantly  lesser extent  in contrast with  that of in  face - to -face (conventional). The  treatment of  conditions, the  operating cost,  and  the organizational-financial  policy of  resources was  also  something that  it must be taken seriously into account. These conditions are  necessary for conducting  educational  seminars  and  simulations  in  order  to  create  or  just  produce  three-dimensional  objects during the learning courses.  Th e  technical  support  that  provided  in  cases  of  lagging  (frozen  screen)  appeared.  Although, as a good point of view which  can prove that Open Sim stability has offered to the  user's system appropriate feedback in case of failure. This can particularly be useful if  someone considers  results from a  large number  of trainees that  be participated (e.g.  in  seminars), without any  extra charge even  in a space -time constraint. It  was also noteworthy  to be  mentioned that the  cost savings  over the  conventional training co urses at 2D  LMS the  24  time that application in a  large scale of participant s was in process and t oo k  part was  implemented  without  any additional fees. The main feature in this  case  is  the  installation  and operation of this  program in computer labs without  users’ payment.  The choice of using  a  system that  endorses  even  the  minimum  requirements in  order  to  “run”  Open  Sim  client  viewer was satisfying and this issue  may bring some financial benefits since  prices of PCs are  not prohibitive in nowadays.  It is pretty remarkable that Table 7  ( a =.76) describes Social-Cultural parameters based on  students’  views  as  positive.  The  implementation  of  the  lesson  succeeded,  according  to  the  schedule, helping them to study in an alternati ve way (see question 5).  Table 7: Descriptive statistics for Social-Cultural para meters  Questions for Social-Cultural parameters  N  Min Max  Mean  SD   Cultural characteristics of "action groups"  1. Can you achieve the successful communication  between other team members when there are some  religious and cultural differences?  95   3   5  3.74  1.17  2. Did you take into account the heterogeneity or  homogeneity of members’ ages or even their religious  beliefs?  95   2 5   3.93  1.33  3. Whether users are familiar with the symbols and  images projected, is this characteristic taking into account  of their social group?  95   2 5   3.15  1.11  Social issues of the contemporary education  4. The “transferability” of users’ values   with the respect  for their diversity to be considered from all team  members?  95   2 5   3.93  1.83  5. Is it possible to obtain the objectives of the online  instructional format according to the contemporary e- Education?  95   2 5   3.93  1.93  For the  fourth research question  (RQ4),  it was trying  to  understand  if  Open Sim and  Sloodle  can offer  those  incentives that  give  an  extra  meaning  and importance  for  an  easier  access  to  knowledge  that  inextricably  linked  according  to  trainees’  socio -cultural  characteristics  (e.g.  differences  in  gender  or  religion  etc.).  The  survey  confirmed  this  question  initial  hypothesis  related  to  transportation  practices  and  user  rights  in  the  environment of Open Sim without distractions.  It is pretty  remarkable that such  a development is  quite positive, considering that the   re - use of SL for educational purposes (at least for the r espondents) remains on track.  25  DISCUSSION  The  contribution  of  this re search  in  online  learning  processes,  through  an  attempt  that  assess  on  students’ learning  processes  with  Open  Sim  and  Sloodle  a s  a  platform  cannot  be  separated from what it comprised a "sustainable" education system. In this sense, the  present  study  emphasized  to  the pecul iar  relationship  that thrived between t he  proposed  project (as a sustainable medium of e-Education) and  students respectively.  The  effectiveness of  online  education s ystems  seems to  vary  not only  from  the design   mode, b ut also  on the  circumstances that  can be  used from  the final  recipients. Several  studies (Gutwin et al., 2011; Kreijins et al.,  2002) have shown that 2D network environments  are no t able  t o supp ort  collaborative  learning processes  or interactive  activities between  users. Some  other studies (Rovai,  2002; Twigg,  1997) have also  claimed the users’ p oor  satisfaction or performances in class and dissatisfaction, leading and a sense of isolation that  affects the overall involvement of students in the  class.  The study results revealed a u nique point of view that can cover some g aps in the  educational research.  It can  be primarily  reflected in  multi-perspective functions o f an  issue  that  must be  further  analyzed.  More  specifically, it  would  be  said  that  the following  evaluative approach to  the development  of various  questions are  being created  some  humanistic viewpoints  and bring  a  different dimension  in  the d ipole  “human - medium”.   The  current study revealed  also  students’ needs  under the  instructor’s  guidance, reflect ed on  CL  activities,  and  were  chosen  more  appropriate  responses  for  performing  usability  and  interoperability  issues of  complex cogniti ve  functions of  the entire  system in   order  to  be  more flexible and adaptable the  activities and their effectiveness, according  to the reliability  of this assessment.  In general, the  effect of the  system’s usability  m ode for users  with  different cognitive background levels  vary in the  degree of familiarity with  computers,  different attitudes  and in  any  occasion it  is  believed that  this may  influence a  weighty  topic  of the current study.  Exploring  and  investigati ng  primary  functional  features  in  better  designing  and  im plementing  courses  in [ C-] VLEs  is considered  as a  very important  in nowadays.  These  functional  features  should  be  enough  for  endorsing  an  e-learning  environment  to  a  virtual  platform. Although, the critical efficiency  parameters concerned with the implementation of  design  principles  that  have  also  been  presented,  but  this  issue  should  be  further  investigated. Eventually, students who participated in this study had enough tim e to become  familiar with  the system;  as they  used constructive tools  or artifacts,  as  therefore Open Sim  played a  prominent  role in  participants’  positive answers.  The  functional features  and basic  aspects o f the  conjunction  between  Open  Sim and  Sloodle  have  also  been presented  along  with the fundamental  design elements, and strategic issues  that must be  taken into account  in developing [C-] VLEs in the future.  The instructional affordances that  unveiled from the current  research are also  very  interesting.  According to  the  above  Open  Sim  with  the  conjunction  of  Sloodle  as  an  innovative educational platform seemed able to:   26  a)  Serve  students’  educational  needs  that live  far  from  their  universities and/or  work  in  other places  and cannot  follow (in-world) app ointments, even  more for  those who ha ve  finished work and they have a free schedule.   b) Facilitate the learning process  in a common 3D  virtual environment in which all  students worked  in identically collabora tive conditi ons by  utilizing v arious media  sharing  devices, visual  artifacts or objects  (primitives) instr uctors can  sufficiently reduce running  costs and  contribute to  savings of  revenue. This  is  important due  to budget  cuts in  this  contemporary era,  which is widely  observed due to  the significant reduction  of working  hours of the temporary teaching staff.  c) Empower  the students’ enga gement  and learning outcomes  for those  users that  enrolled  with  the  online  co urse  delivery  method.  In  these  circumstances,  it  can  be  underlined beyond the positive feedback from all students are not excluded or substitute for  one another, but can be very complementary in  many ways with the conventional.  d) Provide a better understanding of the added valu e that Open Sim can provide.  The educational implications that revealed ar e the following:     Open  Sim  and  Sloodle  can represen t  a r elatively  innovative  generation of learning  environments  that  are  potential  for  the  development  of  constructive  and  experiential-based activities in an online instructi onal format.     Open  Sim can  be  the  n ext step   of W eb  2.0 an d n ot  a  “Pandora’s  Box”,  in  which  virtual communities  can have only  unique social ex perience and  interaction with  other members to co-construct or co-existence a n ovel knowledge domain.     Educators and  researchers may  have some  multiple options  to connect even  with  LMS resources or only in a 3D multi-user and open source VW while they participate  in collaborative learning-based  scenarios that may suf ficiently determine the  learning  processes and the acquisition of knowledge in  higher levels.  Some  of  the  most  advanced  contributing  efforts  that  can  be  underlined  accor ding  to  this  study results are described below:     The  expanded  analysis  of  95 graduate and postgra duate  students  who  involved  in  online  courses  with Open Sim and Sloodle  as  in  VWs  area  lacks fr om  an  empirical  study.     The analysis  of  dynamic  dimensions from  st udents’  engagement that  it  was offered  with their intervention in Open Sim with the online  course delivery method.     The  empirical  study  results  that  emerged  from  the  interrelation  between  the  students’ engagement  from different  disciplines participated and  evaluated the  unique contribution of Sloodle and Open Sim.     The current study  can be suggested to instructors  of the Higher education as  a  guideline for  co ntacting, organizing  and  measuring  effectively educational  activities  held in Open Sim.  CONCLUSION  This new knowledge field tends to  replace the traditional way of (e-) educational practice  composed  in n owadays th rough  three diff erent  dimensions:  the c ognitive,  the emoti onal  and  the social.  Inasmuch as,  the  need  of creating  equal  opportunities  for excluded  social  27  groups, is more crucial today  than ever before. Ensuring the lifelong  learning and exemption  from the spatial-temporal commitments of the traditional way that seemed w orthy for Open  and Distance education, it is equally important to mention that this project was really  effective in contrast to the conventional one.  Apparently,  tools  and  functions  of  a  user-friendly an d  virtual  environment  can  improve  students’  performances  efficiently  and  must  be  further  noticed.  The  combination  between  Web -based and 3D interactive technologies can facilitate a variety of alternative modes of e- learning and significant advantages that  affected stud ents’ participation:   (a)   Visualizing  innovative  concepts,  observing  new  phenomena  or  situations  in  extremely small or large spatial and temp oral scales.  (b)   Providing to users real-time feedback on their failu re or success.  (c)   Exploiting activities  in a macroscopic  o r microscop ic view in  order  to implement  learning scenarios based on contemporary learning  procedures.  (d)   Students can  construct their  o wn  knowledge field  and learn  the acquired e-skills  through individual or group-based activities in pre-desi gned virtual spaces.  To  sum up  the  majority of  previous  efforts focused  on  exploring the  possibilities  of VWs  as learning platforms.  At least theoretically  the utilization of these  platforms cannot overlap  the needs of face- to -face discussions between real people, but can  complement situations of  real  life  that  is  used  for  supplementary o nline courses,  and  understand  learning  events.  By  spreading the  technology of  VWs and serving  the  needs of  modern teaching  or learning  approaches, users are enable to use  the most urgent affiliates by enlarging the  effectiveness  between learning  events and  the acquisition  of knowledge,  but at  the  same time  setting up  rules of governing this effect.  This empirical research was based on a  descriptive (holistic) pedagogical framework  composed  with  four  different  parameters that contribut ed   to  the e valuation  of  a learning   application or a general idea of conducting a  controlled experiment in Open Sim. To be most  useful and  effective  this  approach  it should  be  based  primarily  on  the potential  usability  of  the learning  environment, and  secondly on  the  investigation of  students’ motivational  beliefs that  may  be  additional parameter  for  the evaluation.  On  the o ther hand,  the  evaluation  of  interoperability  issues  between  Sloodle  and  Open  Sim  according  to  students’  experiences  in  an  empirical  study  was  raised  by  four  individual,  but  eventually  interlocking  pillars  that  add  a  value  for  investigating  parameters  like  the  pedagogical,  technical,  psychological, and social. This can  help educators to further diagnoses other  problems  encountered  in  virtual  environments  and  improve  greatly  the  interaction  between users  in  collaborative learning processes. In this case  it is crucial to identify  that a learning process in  a 3D multi-user VWs can be more complex than  in the simplified 2D LMS.  Consistent  with  Duncan  et  al.  (2012) th e  successful  integration  of  students  in  3D  m ulti- user  VWs  can  inspire  them  to  collaborate  with  others  via  verbal  or  non-verbal  communication  tools.  Experimental  and  constructive  learning  in  collaborative  settings ,  according  to  the  same  researchers  can be  achieved at  higher levels,  something that  also  proved  from  the  current  study.  Regarding  to  Fallon  (2010)  higher  order  skills  (analyzing  or  creating) can  be demonstrated  in 3D  multi-user VWs  to facilitate  educational scopes  for  teaching, and that this was also achieved in this pr oject.  28  Summing up  the aforementioned  reasons Open  Sim and  Sloodle  can be  effectively  integrated  as  an  alternative  and  flexible  learning  platform  with  a-/synchronous  communication  tools  and  most  importantly  the  synchronicity  of  learning  activities  that  are  visible  to  users  who  atte nd ed   in  a  common  3D   multi-user  VW.  Furthermore,  based  on  the  evaluation results that presented  above can be easily  understood that Open Sim as  a  platform  combines a  variety  of  features,  and  workshops  by  supporting communication  and  cooperation protocols in  order to  improve performance levels that  set by  previous methods  of distance learning.  In conclusion, it is crucial to be mentioned that it considered that  3D multi-user and open  source VWs  with  the conjunction  of  the LMS  as  a highly  engrossing domain  of  “transferring  the knowledge field ” which in  other cases would   not be as i mpossible and  effective as  learning project. Despite that this project affe cted positively students’  performances, such as  the  personal  interaction  with  the  instructor  in  reality  cannot  be  replaced  so  easily,  even  if  this  interaction  in  a  virtual  environment achie ved  via  verbal or non -verbal  communication  channels.  LIMITATIONS  Some of the most notable limitations that sh ould be considered seriously into account are:  (a) The  sample size was voluntary  (95, i.e. 76%  correspondents of the  total 125 that  took  part  in  both  semesters)  from  one  Institute  of  Technology.  Thereupon,  homogeneity  of the   sample can be observed.  (b) The current study deployed and taught with a systematic support to  the online  educational program.  (c)  The  s tudents’ characteristics  and as  well as  the socioeconomic  or ethnic  backgrounds  may differ  from other  universities, and as  a result,  the findings of this  study cannot be  generalized.  REFERENCES  Berns, A., Gonzalez-Pablo, A. &  Camacho, D. (2013). Game-like  language in 3-D virtual  environments.  Computers & Education, 60 (1), 210-2 20.  Bonfield,  A., Burden,  K., Cram,  A.  &  Lumkin, K.  (2012). Using  scenario  planning to  inform  pedagogical practice  in  virtual worlds:  Collaboration  and Structure.  Australasian  Society  for  Computers in  Learning in  Tertiary  Education  Conference  (pp.  1-10).  Wellington: New  Zealand.  Bloomfield, P. (2011). Expanding a VLE-based integration framework supporting education in  Second Life.  Serious Games and Edutainment applica tions, 4,  369-396.  29  Broaddribb, S., & Carter C. (2009). Using Second Life in human resource de velopment.  British  Journal of Educational Technology, 40 (3), 547-55 0.  Brown, A., & Green, T. (2009). Issues and trends in instructional technology: Web 2.0,  Second Life,  and STEM  share the  spotlight. In  M. Orey,  V. J.  McClendon, &  R.  M. Branch  (Eds),  Educational Media   and Technology Yearbook,  34 , 7 ‐ 23.   Callaghan, M.J., Mc Cusker, K., Losada, J.L.,  Harkin, J. & Wilson, S. (2009). Engineering  Education Island: Teaching Engineering in Virtual  Worlds.  ITALICS .  H.E.A  Information and  Computer Sciences, 8 (3) 2- 17.   Chaney, D., Chan ey, E.,  & Eddy, J . (2010). The  context of distance learning  programs in   higher  education:  Five  enabling  assumptions.  Online  Journal  of  Distance  Learning  Administration,  13(5).  Retrieved  12  August  2013  from  http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla   Clark, S.  & Maher,  M . (20 01). The  Role of  Place in  Designing a  Learner Centered  Virtual  Learning Environment,  Proceedings  of CAAD  Futures Conference   (pp. 187-200).  The  Netherlands: Springer.  De   Lucia  A.,  Francese  R.,  Passero  I.,  &  Tortora  G.  (2009).  Development  and  evaluation  of  a  virtual campus on second life:  The case of secondDMI.  Computers & Education ,  52 ,  220 – 233.  Dickey,  E.  (2005).  Three-dimensional  virtual  worlds  and  distance  learning:  two  case  studies  of Active World  as a medium  of distance education.  British Journal of Educational  Technology, 36 (3), 439-451.  Dickey, M.  (2011). The  pragmatics of  virtual worlds for  K-12  educators: Investigating  the  affordances and  constraints of  Active Worlds  and Second  Life with  K-12 in-service  teachers.  Educational Technology Research and  Development, 59 (1), 1 – 20.   Duncan, I.,  Miller,  A., &  Jiang, S.  (2012).  A taxonomy  of  virtual worlds  usage in  education.  British Journal of Educational Technology ,  43 (6), 949- 964.  Guomin,  Z.,  &  Jianxin,  Z.  (2010).  An  Educational  Value  Analysis  of  SLOODLE-Based  Distributed  Virtual  Learning  System.  Education  Technology  and  Computer  Science,  International Workshop   on ,  3 ( ETCS 2011) (pp. 402-405). Wuhan, China.  Hobbs,  M.,  Brown, E., & Gordon, M.  (2006).  Using  a  virtual  world  for  transferable  skills in   gaming  education.  Innovation  in Teaching  and Learning  in Information  and Computer  Sciences ,  5 (3), 1-13.  Holst, S., & Holmer, T. (2000).  Continuous evaluation of web -based cooperative learning: The  conception  and  development  of   an  evaluation  toolkit .  Retrieved  June  2003  from  http://newmedia.colorado.edu/cscl/171.pdf  Johnson, S.D., Suriya, C., Won Yoon, S., Berrett, J.V., & La Fleur, J. (2002). Team development  and group processes of virtual learning tea ms.  Computers & Education ,  39 (2), 379 – 393. 30  Kemp, J., Livingstone, D. &  Bloomfield, P. (2009). SLOODLE: Connecting VLE  tools with  emergent  teaching Prac tice in  Second Life.  British Journal  of Educa tional T echnology,  40 (3), 551-555.  Koster, R. (2004).   A virtual  world by any  other name?  Retrieved 12 October  2012 from  http://terranova.blogs.com/terra_nova /2004/06/a_virtual_world.html .  Koutsabasis,  P. Vosinakis,  S.  Malisova, K.  &  Paparounas,  N.  (2012).  On  the Value  of   Virtual Worlds for Collaborative Design.  Design Studie s,  33 (4), 357 – 390.  Lehtinen E.  &  Hakkarainen  K.  (2001).  Computer supported  collaborative  learning:  A review.  Retrieved 12 October 2012 from  http://www.co mlab. hut . fi /opetus/205/etatehtava 1. pdf   Leong,  C. (2011).  Using  virtual  world  platform for  language  and  critical thinking  skills  and  practice .  Retrieved  23  March  2012,  from:  http://www.pixel- online.net/ICT4LL2011/common/download /Paper_pdf/ILT47-359- FP -Leong- ICT4LL2011.pdf   Livingstone,  D.  &  Bloomfield,  R.  (2010).  Mixed-Methods  and  Mixed-Worlds:  Engaging  Globally D istributed User  Groups  for  Extended Evaluation  and  Studies. In  A.  Peachey,  J.  Gillen, D. Livingstone &  S. Smith-Robbins (Eds.),  Research  Learning in Virtual Worlds  (pp.  159-176). London, UK: Springer.  Mark, S. &  Mark, C. (2011).  Virtual team  building: Employing Immersive  virtual learning  environments  to  facilitate  team  trust  and  identity .  Retrieved  30  September  2012  from:  http://www.swdsi.org/swdsi2011/2011_SWDSI_ Proceedings/papers/papers/PA159.pdf   Jochems,  W.,  Van  Merrienboer,  G.,  &  Koper,  R.  (Eds.).  (2004).  Integrated  E-learning:  Implications for pedagogy, technology, and organiz ation . London: Routledge Falmer.  Pellas, N.  & Kazanidis,  I. (2013a). Engaging students  in  blended and  online collaborative  courses  at  university  level  through  Second  Life:  Comparative  perspectives  and  instructional  affordances.  New  Review  of  Hypermedia  and  Multimedia  Journal.  DOI:10.1080/13614568.2013.856958.  Pellas,  N.  &  Kazanidis,  I.  (2013b).  The  impact  of  computer  self-efficacy,  situational  interest  and academic self-concept in virtual communities o f inquiry during the distance learning  procedures  through Second  Life.  World  Wide  Web  Journal.  DOI:  10.1007/s11280-013- 0266-9 .   Pellas,  N.  &  Kazanidis,  I.  (2013c).  On  the  v alue  of  Second  Life  for stud ents’  engagement  in  hybrid  and  online  university-level  courses:  A  comparative  study  from  Higher  education  in Greece.  Education and Information Technologies . DOI: 10.1 007/s10639-013-9294-4  Pellas, N.,  Peroutseas, E.  & Kazanidis,  I. (2013).  Virtual communiti es  of inquiry  (VCoI) for  learning basic  algorithmic  structures  with  Open  Simulator &  Scratch4(OS):  A  case  study  from  the  Secondary  Education  in  Greece.  In  K.  Diamantaras,  G.  Evangelidis,  Y.  Manolopoulos,  C.  Georgiadis,  P.  Kefalas,  D.  Stamatis  (Eds.),  Balkan  Conference  in  Informatics, BCI '13 (pp. 187-194). Thessaloniki, Gree ce: ACM Press. 31  Pellas,  N.  (2014a).  The  development  of  a  virtual  learning  platform  for  teaching  concurrent  programming  languages  in  the  Secondary  Education:  The  use  of  Open  Sim  and  Scratch4OS.  Journal of e-Learning and Knowledge  Society, 10 (1), 129-143.  Pellas, N. (2014b). The influence of computer self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation and  self-esteem on student  engagement in  online learning programs:  Evidence from the  virtual  world  of  Second  Life.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior .  DOI  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.048   Phipps, R.,  & Merisotis,  J. (1999).  What’s the  difference? A review  of contemporary research  on the effectiveness of  distance learning in higher education.   Washington, DC: The   institute  for  higher  education  policy.  Retrieved  30  September  2012  from  http://www.ihep.com/Pubs/PDF/Difference.pdf   Pfister,  H.,  Wessner,  M.,  Holmer,  T.,  &  Steinmetz,  R.  (1999).  Evaluating  distributed  computer-  supported  cooperative learning  (D-CSCL):  A  framework and  some  data.  Proceedings  of  the 2nd  international  conference  on  new lea rning  technologies  (NLT99)   (pp. 234-241). University of Berne, Switzerland.   Ragan, E., Bowman,  D. & Huber,  K. (2012). Supporting  cognitive processing  with spatial  information presentations in virtual  environments.  Virtual Reality .  Doi: 10.1007/s10055- 012-0211- 8.   Rebmann, S. (2013). A review of literac y frameworks for learning environments design .  Learning environments research, 16 (1), 239 – 257.   Rico,  M.,  Mart ν nez- Mu ρ oz,  G., Alaman,  X., Camacho,  D., Pulido,  E. (2011).  Improving the   programming  experience  of  High  school  students  by  means  o f  virtual  worlds.  International Journal of Engineering Education, 2 7 (1),  52 - 60.   Ryoo,  J.,  Techatassanasoontorn,  A.,  Lee,  D.  &   Lothian,  J.  (2011).  Game-based  Infosec  education  using  Open  Sim.  Proceedings  of  the  15 th   Colloquium  for  Information systems  security  Education ,  Ohio.  Retrieved  12  June  2012  from  http://pike.psu.edu/publications/cisse11.pdf .  Rovai, P. (2002). Building sense of community at a distance . Internation al Review of Research  in Open and Distance Learning, 3 (1), 1-16.  Singh,  Κ .  (2007).  Quantitative  social  research  methods .  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage  Publications.  Shih ,  Y.-C.,  & Yang M.-T. (2008). A collab orative  virtual  environment  for situa ted  language  learning using VEC3D.  Educational Technology & Socie ty ,  11  (1), 56- 68.   Twigg, A. (1997). Is technology a silver bullet ?  Educom Review, 31 (2), 28- 39.   Wang,  C.,  Caladra,  B.,  Hibbard,  S.  &  McDowell  LeFraiver,  M.  (2012).  L earning  effects  of  an  experiential  EFL  program  in  Second  Life.  Educational  Technology  and  Research  Development, 60 (1), 943-961. 32  Yasar, O., & Adiguzel, T.  (2010). A workin g successor of learning  management systems:  SLOODLE.  Procedia  –  Social and Behavioral Sciences ,  2 (2), 5682-5685.  Yu,  W.  (2009). Learning  in  the  virtual  world:  The  pedagogical  potentials of  Massively  Multiplayer Online Role Play Games.  Internationa l Educational Studies, 2 (1), 32-38. 

... This requirement also could be addressed by providing open education [47,61,114] as well as government and society support [119,134] in both formal or informal learning methods [70]. Thus, as Ossiannilsson and Landgren [110] highlighted the support of lifelong learning would become crucial for sustainable eLearning systems. ... ... For example, eLearning system shall provide discussions board that allow users to participate in a conversation with an entire class or group. Using the discussion board or tools for instant feedback between learners and instructors could improve the learning curve [42,114]. In the same way, Pellas [114] highlighted providing real-time feedback could impact learners on their failure or success as well as enhance practice-based tasks. ... ... Using the discussion board or tools for instant feedback between learners and instructors could improve the learning curve [42,114]. In the same way, Pellas [114] highlighted providing real-time feedback could impact learners on their failure or success as well as enhance practice-based tasks. Ossiannilsson and Landgren [110] stated that collaboration is a key element of success in eLearning systems. ...[Sustainability requirements for eLearning systems: a systematic literature review and analysis](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325476701_Sustainability_requirements_for_eLearning_systems_a_systematic_literature_review_and_analysis)Article Full-text available

Dec 2019

REQUIR ENG

[Ahmed D. Alharthi](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325476701_Sustainability_requirements_for_eLearning_systems_a_systematic_literature_review_and_analysis)

[Maria Spichkova](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325476701_Sustainability_requirements_for_eLearning_systems_a_systematic_literature_review_and_analysis)

[Margaret Hamilton](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325476701_Sustainability_requirements_for_eLearning_systems_a_systematic_literature_review_and_analysis)

eLearning systems have become a very important part of teaching, both as web-based systems for online education and as auxiliary tools for face-to-face study, where they provide an additional learning support for on-campus learners. To insure the sustainability of an eLearning system on both individual and social levels, we have to cover many aspects of sustainability requirements: human, technical, economic, and environmental. This paper provides a systematic literature review of the sustainability meta-requirements for eLearning systems to identify open problems and to present the state of the art of this research area. We analysed 124 papers, so we identified 18 high-level sustainability requirements for eLearning systems.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325476701_Sustainability_requirements_for_eLearning_systems_a_systematic_literature_review_and_analysis)... These are the following (Glancy and Moore 2013;Slough and Milam 2013): (i) Communal Constructionism (learning delivered when all students construct their knowledge domain, usually by constructing meaningful products, or by providing their findings in the environment and communicating with others to configure their actions); (ii) Constructivism (learning is a subjective and internal process of building meanings and it is considered as the result of organization and adaptation of new information into the existing knowledge that students already have to enhance their experiences); (iii) Social Constructivism (learning is achieved with the social interaction among students in scaffolding instruction, in which the instructor can give feedback on the on hand, and on the other should gradually abstains from students' activities in contemplation of allowing them build upon their prior experiences and internalize new information to gain the new one), or (iv) Situated learning (learning is defined not as a function of an individual effort, but a socio-cultural function in a pre-defined framework carried out through communication and interaction among students who participate in ill-defined problem-based contexts). By combining theoretical foundations of learning theories with alternative learning techniques or approaches that referred above, instructors and scholars can implement learning scenarios to one or more of the following (Davis 2012;Pellas 2014): a) problem-solving processes using different forms of representation to present a solution to a problem, b) practical hands-on experiments for the experimentation and exploration of abstract concepts, c) collaborative learning processes by utilizing tools that enable students to apply the learning material towards proposed solutions. ... ... Due to the 3-D visually-rich graphical user interface, users (spatially distributed or not) can interact with a−/synchronous communication channels with others as embodied representations (avatars). A 3-D multi-user virtual world provides interactive simulations in a plausible illusion and it permits users (i) to construct realistic situations using simulated 3-D modelled environment on real places and several constructions with built-in tools and geometric objects; (ii) to refine rules of the spatial proximity with high fidelity; and (iii) to restructure the dynamic dimensions of the knowledge transfer in socio-constructivist learning contexts, in order to improve their achievements (Pellas 2014). The three main categories of 3-D multi-user virtual worlds based on the reviewed studies are the following: ... ... Generally, 3-D multi-user virtual worlds can provide alternative and effective options due to the built-in learning tools and a−/synchronous communication tools, fostering not only students' motivation, but also their meaningful participation in collaborative tasks in blended or (fully) online instructional formats (Pellas 2014). Users' participation in online 3-D multi-user virtual worlds as a powerful magnet drawing users worldwide, offering incentives for socialization or collaboration to achieve common learning goals. ...[Exploring the educational potential of three-dimensional multi-user virtual worlds for STEM education: A mixed-method systematic literature review](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)Article Full-text available

Sep 2017

Educ Inform Tech

[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)

[Ioannis Kazanidis](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)

[Konstantinou Nikolaos](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)

[Georgiou Georgia](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)

The present literature review builds on the results of 50 research articles published from 2000 until 2016. All these studies have successfully accomplished various learning tasks in the domain of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education using three-dimensional (3-D) multiuser virtual worlds for Primary, Secondary and Higher education, in order to: (a) present an overview about the potential contribution of this technology in practice-based perspectives on knowledge and learning; (b) identify the theoretical underpinnings based on contemporary learning theories and pedagogical approaches that leverage content design characteristics, with the respect to the constructs of their instructional design methods; (c) suggest a synthesis of the relevant literature about how the utilization of 3-D multiuser virtual worlds have affected positively learning outcomes based on students' achievements; (d) concretize the educational potential and instructional affordances covering the pedagogical (socio-) cognitive, technological-operational and financial perspectives; and lastly (e) propose an instructional design workflow to contextualize pedagogical content design principles for the implementation of different learning scenarios in STEM courses. The overviewed articles ascertained that 3-D multiuser virtual worlds have many instructional and technological affordances as candidate learning platforms for different educational levels, influencing to a large extent students' attendance, knowledge transfer, skill acquisition, hands-on digital experience and positive attitudes in laboratory experimental exercises. This technology gives to users the opportunity to manage learning materials more effectively and efficiently during the teaching process. The vast majority of educational benefits and potential enhanced the degree of their engagement and participation, contributing positively to their achievements.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308647450_Exploring_the_educational_potential_of_three-dimensional_multi-user_virtual_worlds_for_STEM_education_A_mixed-method_systematic_literature_review)... However, two key studies address the challenges of interoperability between the 2D and 3D data content. These studies explore integrating 2D digital ecosystems into emerging 3D Metaverse environments, expanding content availability during early development [96] and aligning the growth of the 3D Metaverse with established 2D systems to enhance user experience [97]. These two studies investigate the structuring of 2D content within 3D spaces [96] and the connection of 3D virtual environments with traditional 2D learning management systems [97], forming a foundation for seamless Metaverse interoperability. ... ... These studies explore integrating 2D digital ecosystems into emerging 3D Metaverse environments, expanding content availability during early development [96] and aligning the growth of the 3D Metaverse with established 2D systems to enhance user experience [97]. These two studies investigate the structuring of 2D content within 3D spaces [96] and the connection of 3D virtual environments with traditional 2D learning management systems [97], forming a foundation for seamless Metaverse interoperability. ...[Interoperability of the Metaverse: A Digital Ecosystem Perspective Review](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)Article Full-text available

Jan 2025

IEEE Eng Manag Rev

[Liang Yang](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Shi-Ting Ni](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Yuyang Wang](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Pan Hui](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

The Metaverse, a pivotal element of the digital revolution, holds transformative potential for industries and lifestyles. Yet, skepticism persists, with concerns that enthusiasm may outstrip technological progress. Interoperability is a key obstacle, as highlighted by a CoinMarketCap report (February 2023) noting over 240 isolated Metaverse initiatives. Despite agreement on its importance, systematic research on interoperability remains scarce. This study bridges the gap through a systematic literature review, using content analysis on Web of Science and Scopus databases, identifying 74 relevant publications. Interoperability lacks a standardized definition, varying by context, while the Metaverse is broadly seen as a digital ecosystem. Urs Gasser's framework for digital ecosystem interoperability—spanning technological, data, human, and institutional dimensions—guides our analysis. By applying this framework across three identified layers, we provide a comprehensive overview of Metaverse interoperability research, establishing benchmarks to advance scholarly exploration in this complex field.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391260077_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)... These investigations delve into integrating content from established 2D digital ecosystems into the nascent 3D environments of the Metaverse. Such integration not only augments the content base, mitigating the scarcity of content in the initial phases of the Metaverse development [99], but also ensures that the development of the 3D Metaverse is in alignment with the established 2D digital milieu, considering user experience requirements [100]. Current research is examining the methods by which 2D content may be invoked and structured within 3D spaces [99], as well as how 3D virtual environments can interconnect with conventional 2D learning management systems [100]. ... ... Such integration not only augments the content base, mitigating the scarcity of content in the initial phases of the Metaverse development [99], but also ensures that the development of the 3D Metaverse is in alignment with the established 2D digital milieu, considering user experience requirements [100]. Current research is examining the methods by which 2D content may be invoked and structured within 3D spaces [99], as well as how 3D virtual environments can interconnect with conventional 2D learning management systems [100]. These endeavors are instrumental in forming the foundational elements of the Metaverse technology's advancement toward seamless interoperability. ...[Interoperability of the Metaverse: A Digital Ecosystem Perspective Review](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)Preprint Full-text available

Jun 2024

[Liang Yang](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Shi-Ting Ni](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Yuyang Wang](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

[Pan Hui](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)

The Metaverse is at the forefront of the digital revolution, with significant potential to transform industries and lifestyles. However, skepticism has emerged within industrial and academic circles, raising concerns that enthusiasm may outpace technological advancements. Interoperability has been identified as a major barrier to realizing its full potential. A report by CoinMarketCap noted that, as of February 2023, over 240 Metaverse initiatives existed in isolation, highlighting this challenge. Despite consensus on the importance of interoperability, systematic research on this theme is lacking. Our study addresses this gap through a systematic literature review, employing content analysis methodologies in a structured search of the Web of Science and Scopus databases, yielding 74 pertinent publications. Interoperability is challenging to define due to varying contexts and lack of a standardized definition. Similarly, the Metaverse lacks a uniform definition but is generally viewed as a digital ecosystem. Urs Gasser proposed a framework for interoperability within digital ecosystems, outlining technological, data, human, and institutional dimensions. Incorporating Gasser's framework, we analyze the literature within our identified three layers to offer a comprehensive overview of Metaverse interoperability research. Our study aims to set benchmarks for future inquiries, guiding this complex field and contributing to its scholarly development.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381435846_Interoperability_of_the_Metaverse_A_Digital_Ecosystem_Perspective_Review)... A virtual world (OpenSim, an open simulator) was integrated with SLOODLE and Moodle environments by Pellas (2014). 94 students used the system and answered a survey having 38 questions. ... ... 94 students used the system and answered a survey having 38 questions. Pellas (2014) proposed that the use of virtual world could increase user's learning ...[Individual and Social Requirement Aspects of Sustainable eLearning Systems](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311067420_Individual_and_Social_Requirement_Aspects_of_Sustainable_eLearning_Systems)Article

Jan 2017

[Ahmed D. Alharthi](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311067420_Individual_and_Social_Requirement_Aspects_of_Sustainable_eLearning_Systems)

[Maria Spichkova](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311067420_Individual_and_Social_Requirement_Aspects_of_Sustainable_eLearning_Systems)

Internationalisation of the higher education has created the so-called borderless university, which provides better opportunities for learning and increases the human and social sustainability. eLearning systems are a special kind of software systems, developed to provide a platform for accessible teaching and learning, including also online access to learning materials and online support for learning and teaching. The aim of our current work is to extract, analyse, and combine the results from multiple studies in order to develop a requirements engineering framework for sustainable eLearning systems. We call a system sustainable, if it has a positive effect on and whose direct and indirect negative impacts resulting from its development, deployment, and usage are minimal. Sustainability has various dimensions. We classify sustainability requirements of eLearning system to five dimensions: individual (human), social, technical, environmental, and economic. In this paper, we focus on human and social aspects (i.e., individual needs the relationship of people within society), as the eLearning systems have a very strong impact on human dimension of sustainability, where their impact on environmental dimension is rather small. This also provides us a basis to identify the corresponding requirements for sustainable eLearning systems. These requirements include collaboration, learner-centred features, leadership development and the reuse of the learning materials. As a result, achieving individual and social requirements for eLearning systems would provide a higher quality of learning and teaching, as well as better opportunities for learning and increasing the human and social sustainability.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311067420_Individual_and_Social_Requirement_Aspects_of_Sustainable_eLearning_Systems)... A university hosted virtual world, based on the OpenSimulator technology, was used to allow Computer Science students explore and familiarise themselves with the Linden Scripting Language-an Event Driven Programming Paradigm-and also, with the 3D modeling concepts. Figure 1 illustrates the narrative and logic which led to our decisions, while designing the inworld content, following the suggestions from researchers to combine multiple learning theories and models with the instructional design techniques and approaches (Pellas, 2014). ...[Implementing Learning Models in Virtual Worlds - From Theory to (Virtual) Reality](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)Conference Paper

Jan 2018

[Athanasios Christopoulos](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

[Marc Conrad](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

[Mitul Shukla](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

The main advantage of Desktop Virtual Reality is that it enables learners to interact with each other both in the physical classroom and in a 3D environment. Even though, no explicit theories or models have been developed to contextualise Virtual Learning, instructional designers have successfully employed the traditional approaches with positive results on learners’ motivation and engagement. However, there is very little we know when the question comes to the importance of examining and taxonomising the impact of interactions on motivation and engagement as a synergy of learners’ concurrent presence. To evaluate the potential of interactions holistically and not just unilaterally, a series of experiments were conducted in the context of our Hybrid Virtual Learning classes underpinned from the instructional designer’s decisions to increase the incentives for interactions. Learners’ thoughts and preconceptions about the use of virtual worlds as an educational tool were surveyed, whilst, their actions and interactions (in both environments) were observed during their practical sessions. The take away is that the higher the levels of interactivity are, the higher the chances to attract students’ attention and engagement with the process will be.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)[Identificação de Pesquisas e Análise de Algoritmos de Clusterização para a Descoberta de Perfis de Engajamento](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)Article Full-text available

Feb 2022

[Pamella L S De Oliveira](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

[Rodrigo Lins Rodrigues](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

[Jorge Luis Cavalcanti Ramos](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

[João Sedraz](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324052458_Implementing_Learning_Models_in_Virtual_Worlds_-_From_Theory_to_Virtual_Reality)

A adoção da Educação a Distância (EAD) é uma tendência que vem ganhando espaço no campo educacional. O número de pessoas que optam por esta modalidade de ensino vem crescendo. Vantagens como flexibilização do horário, diversidade de acesso geográfico e uso de tecnologias como meio de acesso proporcionam um aumento de adesão. Apesar destes benefícios que são oferecidos por meio da modalidade E-learning (Ensino Eletrônico) e das ferramentas de estudo, como LMS (Sistema de Gestão de Aprendizagem), as instituições ainda enfrentam altos índices de evasão e baixo número de concluintes. Pesquisas mostram uma forte ligação entre o engajamento dos alunos e o desempenho acadêmico, o que requer dos gestores e pesquisadores em educação mais atenção nos fatores que influenciam os níveis de engajamento dos alunos ao longo do curso, em vez de apenas considerar a taxa de conclusão. Neste sentido, este trabalho teve o objetivo de entender a relação entre os níveis de engajamento com o desempenho acadêmico. A pesquisa foi dividida em duas fases: na primeira buscou-se apresentar uma revisão sistemática para encontrar estudos que abordem o fenômeno do engajamento e seus desdobramentos; na segunda fase aplicou-se técnicas de mineração de dados educacionais (EDM) para extrair e analisar dados comportamentais de seis mil e quinhentos e vinte e sete estudantes ao longo de um curso de graduação. Como resultado da revisão sistemática foi possível obter as respostas das cinco questões de pesquisas nos vinte e seis artigos retornados nos repositórios de busca IEEExplore, Science Direct e Springer. Além disso, os resultados da aplicação da técnica de EDM possibilitaram identificar três perfis diferentes de engajamento, que podem contribuir para a tomada de decisão pedagógica, bem como o desenvolvimento de desenhos metodológicos que diminuam os níveis de evasão em um curso.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)[Title: Research Identification and Analysis of Clustering Algorithms for the Discovery of Engagement Profiles](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)Article Full-text available

Feb 2022

[Pamella L S De Oliveira](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)

[Rodrigo Lins Rodrigues](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)

[Jorge Luis Cavalcanti Ramos](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)

[João Sedraz](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360037607_Identificacao_de_Pesquisas_e_Analise_de_Algoritmos_de_Clusterizacao_para_a_Descoberta_de_Perfis_de_Engajamento)

Resumo A adoção da Educação a Distância (EAD) é uma tendência que vem ganhando espaço no campo educacional. O número de pessoas que optam por esta modalidade de ensino vem crescendo. Vantagens como flexibilização do horário, diversidade de acesso geográfico e uso de tecnologias como meio de acesso proporcionam um aumento de adesão. Apesar destes benefícios que são oferecidos por meio da modalidade E-learning (Ensino Eletrônico) e das ferramentas de estudo, como LMS (Sistema de Gestão de Aprendizagem), as instituições ainda enfrentam altos índices de evasão e baixo número de concluintes. Pesquisas mostram uma forte ligação entre o engajamento dos alunos e o desempenho acadêmico, o que requer dos gestores e pesquisadores em educação mais atenção nos fatores que influenciam os níveis de engajamento dos alunos ao longo do curso, em vez de apenas considerar a taxa de conclusão. Neste sentido, este trabalho teve o objetivo de entender a relação entre os níveis de engajamento com o desempenho acadêmico. A pesquisa foi dividida em duas fases: na primeira buscou-se apresentar uma revisão sistemática para encontrar estudos que abordem o fenômeno do engajamento e seus desdobramentos; na segunda fase aplicou-se técnicas de mineração de dados educacionais (EDM) para extrair e analisar dados comportamentais de seis mil e quinhentos e vinte e sete estudantes ao longo de um curso de graduação. Como resultado da revisão sistemática foi possível obter as respostas das cinco questões de pesquisas nos vinte e seis artigos retornados nos repositórios de busca IEEExplore, Science Direct e Springer. Além disso, os resultados da aplicação da técnica de EDM possibilitaram identificar três perfis diferentes de engajamento, que podem contribuir para a tomada de decisão pedagógica, bem como o desenvolvimento de desenhos metodológicos que diminuam os níveis de evasão em um curso. Palavras-chave: Engajamento; Educação a Distância; Interação; Desempenho; Mineração de dados educacionais. Abstract The adoption of Distance Education (EAD) is a trend that has been gaining ground in the educational field. The number of people who choose this type of education has been growing. Advantages such as flexible hours, diversity of geographic access and the use of technologies as a means of access provide an increase in adherence. Despite these benefits that are offered through the E-learning modality (Electronic Learning) and study tools such as LMS (Learning Management System), institutions still face high dropout rates and a low number of graduates. Research shows a strong link between student engagement and academic performance, which requires education managers and researchers to pay more attention to the factors that influence student engagement levels throughout the course, rather than just considering the completion rate. In this sense, this work aimed to understand the relationship between levels of engagement with academic performance. The research was divided into two phases, in the first one it sought to present a systematic review to find studies that address the phenomenon of engagement and its consequences. In the second phase, it applied educational data mining (EDM) techniques to extract and analyze behavioral data from[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)[Validity and Reliability of the Sense of Belonging Instrument with Online Graduate Nursing Students](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)Conference Paper

Oct 2019

[Charles Johnson](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)

[Jeffrey Taylor](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)

[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)[Exploitation of the Virtual Worlds in Tourism and Tourism Education](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)Article Full-text available

Dec 2016

[Pavel Zejda](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)

[David Zejda](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359330265_Title_Research_Identification_and_Analysis_of_Clustering_Algorithms_for_the_Discovery_of_Engagement_Profiles)

Academics perceive a great potential of virtual worlds in various areas, including tourism and education. Efforts adapting the virtual worlds in practice are, however, still marginal. There is no clear definition of the virtual world. Therefore the author of this article attempts to provide one. The paper also focuses on the barriers of a wider exploitation of the virtual worlds and discusses the principles that might help to increase their potential in tourism area. One of the principles – gamification – favours a wider adaptation of the virtual worlds in tourism. Applying gamification principles provides visitors with some unique experiences while serving as a powerful marketing tool for institutions. The benefits of implementing tourism education activities based on cooperative principles set in an immersive environment of the virtual worlds are depicted afterwards. Finally, this paper includes successful case studies, which show advantages and drawbacks of some approaches in exploiting the virtual worlds in tourism and tourism education.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)[Using Scenario Planning to Inform Pedagogical Practice in Virtual Worlds in Schools: Collaboration and Structure](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)Article Full-text available

Nov 2012

[Christopher Alan Bonfield](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)

[Kevin John Burden](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)

[Andrew Cram](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)

[Katy Lumkin](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322720036_Exploitation_of_the_Virtual_Worlds_in_Tourism_and_Tourism_Education)

The learning affordances of virtual worlds have long being trumpeted; the barriers to the ?take up of virtual worlds in mainstream education have also been explored, with emphasis being placed on technical problems, lack of time and money. Yet, a challenge for future learning is how one teaches in a virtual world, and what research has been undertaken has focused largely upon tertiary education. Much less is understood about how school teachers should structure virtual lessons, and what level of collaboration or independent work is necessary to guide students towards attainment of learning outcomes. This paper will provide a theoretical review of teaching and learning in virtual worlds, and offer an initial discussion of the role and importance of structure and collaboration in virtual worlds in a school-based environment. This has been validated through four case studies using scenario-planning methodology, and drawing upon real- world practitioner-based examples.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396423371_Using_Scenario_Planning_to_Inform_Pedagogical_Practice_in_Virtual_Worlds_in_Schools_Collaboration_and_Structure)[The influence of computer self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation and self-esteem on student engagement in online learning programs: Evidence from the virtual world of Second Life](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396423371_Using_Scenario_Planning_to_Inform_Pedagogical_Practice_in_Virtual_Worlds_in_Schools_Collaboration_and_Structure)Article Full-text available

Mar 2014

COMPUT HUM BEHAV

[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396423371_Using_Scenario_Planning_to_Inform_Pedagogical_Practice_in_Virtual_Worlds_in_Schools_Collaboration_and_Structure)

While the widespread acceptance of social virtual words is being increased in the last years, little are known about how students’ personal factors can affect their engagement in online learning courses. The current study proposed and empirically examined a conceptual model that aimed to fill this gap. The main purpose is to present an extensive empirical data of 305 novice or expert students (153 graduates and 152 postgraduates) who enrolled in online courses at university level which were held in Second Life. On this occasion it was tried to be investigated, measured and finally verified the effects of computer self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation and self-esteem that can predict the students’ engagement as an overall multidimensional construct of factors (cognitive, emotional and behavioral). The results from the three-step hierarchical regression analysis revealed that computer self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation, and self-esteem in online courses were not only positively correlated with student’s cognitive and emotional engagement factors, but were also negatively correlated with behavioral factors. Educational implications from these results can provide a more expedient and meritorious instructional quality format aimed at reinforcing users’ engagement in Second Life for sequencing and pacing future-driven online courses.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260584567_The_influence_of_computer_self-efficacy_metacognitive_self-regulation_and_self-esteem_on_student_engagement_in_online_learning_programs_Evidence_from_the_virtual_world_of_Second_Life)[The development of a virtual learning platform for teaching concurrent programming languages in Secondary education: The use of Open Sim and Scratch4OS](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260584567_The_influence_of_computer_self-efficacy_metacognitive_self-regulation_and_self-esteem_on_student_engagement_in_online_learning_programs_Evidence_from_the_virtual_world_of_Second_Life)Article Full-text available

Jan 2014

[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260584567_The_influence_of_computer_self-efficacy_metacognitive_self-regulation_and_self-esteem_on_student_engagement_in_online_learning_programs_Evidence_from_the_virtual_world_of_Second_Life)

The present study introduces two well-known technologically-advanced environments in a computer laboratory of a Greek High School and highlights the growing challenges and affordances that students face after its utilization. For this purpose it was created a mind-trap puzzle game in a virtual learning platform emanated from the conjunction of the three-dimensional (3D) virtual world Open Sim and the two-dimensional (2D) Scratch4OS programming environment. Nowadays virtual worlds have been acknowledged as the most well-known candidate platforms for the implementation of collaborative learning scenarios in different disciplines of Higher education. However a research about their effect on students’ engagement in Secondary education is still infrequent. The aim of this study is twofold: (a) to present the rationale of this conjunction and (b) to describe the students’ experiences in order to learn concurrent and visual programming commands in this unique platform. The paper tabulates not only a summary of some problems and challenges existed during the learning procedure, but also with some instructional implications that the increasing role of this unique platform can establish. Conclusive remarks based on students’ opinions and experiences briefly encoded some interesting issues which also ascertained.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259653980_The_development_of_a_virtual_learning_platform_for_teaching_concurrent_programming_languages_in_Secondary_education_The_use_of_Open_Sim_and_Scratch4OS)[On the value of Second Life for students’ engagement in blended and online courses: A comparative study from the Higher Education in Greece](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259653980_The_development_of_a_virtual_learning_platform_for_teaching_concurrent_programming_languages_in_Secondary_education_The_use_of_Open_Sim_and_Scratch4OS)Article Full-text available

Nov 2013

[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259653980_The_development_of_a_virtual_learning_platform_for_teaching_concurrent_programming_languages_in_Secondary_education_The_use_of_Open_Sim_and_Scratch4OS)

Nowadays three-dimensional (3D) multi-user virtual worlds (VWs) are the most well-known candidate platforms in Higher education. Despite the growing number of notable studies that have presented VWs as valuable platforms for the e-Education, there is still a paucity of a comparative study in order to be determined the degree of the students' engagement in constructionist-collaborative learning scenarios. Concurrently, it seems imperative the need for educators and scholars to identify how can VWs influence students' engagement in contemporary and reliable instructional formats, mainly on blended or online settings for university-level courses. In this study the effects of students' achievements were measured by comparing the degree of students' engagement from two student groups (graduate and undergraduate) enrolled in two different instructional formats (blended/online) held in Second Life (SL) to become learning content developers. The purpose of the current research is to present results from the comparative study of one hundred twenty-five (125) students that finally attended in order to be measured their engagement overall as a multi-dimensional construct consisting of the emotional, behavioral and cognitive factors. The study findings from the quantitative analysis have disclosed that graduate students who participated in online courses achieved more positive learning outcomes and as a result the degree of their engagement was significantly increased than those who enrolled with the blended. In these circumstances there are raised some fundamental educational implications which are also discussed.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259005499_On_the_value_of_Second_Life_for_students'_engagement_in_blended_and_online_courses_A_comparative_study_from_the_Higher_Education_in_Greece)[The impact of computer self-efficacy, situational interest and academic self-concept in virtual communities of inquiry during the distance learning procedures through Second Life](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259005499_On_the_value_of_Second_Life_for_students'_engagement_in_blended_and_online_courses_A_comparative_study_from_the_Higher_Education_in_Greece)Article Full-text available

Oct 2013

[Nikolaos Pellas](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259005499_On_the_value_of_Second_Life_for_students'_engagement_in_blended_and_online_courses_A_comparative_study_from_the_Higher_Education_in_Greece)

[Ioannis Kazanidis](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259005499_On_the_value_of_Second_Life_for_students'_engagement_in_blended_and_online_courses_A_comparative_study_from_the_Higher_Education_in_Greece)

The current study investigates a case where the online learning procedure in three-dimensional (3D) technologically-advanced environments of the Web 2.0 is growing at an exponential rate. In this occasion it is highly imperative need to understand students’ interactions in this innovative mode of e-Education that requires from educators and scholars not only analysis conceptually, but also an empirically-driven optimization. The community of inquiry (CoI) model (or framework) consists to be as one of the most prominent multi-dimensional constructs that it is widely used to represent several distinct dimensions of social presence, teaching presence and cognitive presence, as a unique and fundamental theoretical concept to measure students’ interactions in contemporary electronic environments. Although, the effectiveness of these multi-dimensional constructs creates a dilemma to researchers who want the breadth and comprehensiveness of this model for the precision and clarity of users’ (instructors and students) dimensions with other motivational and learning variables. To address this dilemma, the current empirical study presents statistical analyses from the “trinity” constructs of the CoI model by utilizing correlation and hierarchical regression analyses with two fundamental motivational (computer self-efficacy and situational interest) and another one learning (academic self-concept) variables. This study goes one step further and introduces the conspicuously indisputable intervention of a virtual (V)CoI and its utilization in multi-user virtual worlds, like Second Life (SL). The study findings of one hundred thirty-five (135) participants who enrolled in several online sessions unveiled that the situational interest was the only significant predictor of social presence. The computer self-efficacy was not a significant predictor of the CoI model, while on the other hand academic self-concept was a significant predictor in a revamped attempt to validate the strong relationship among constructs within it. According to the aforementioned reasons, it can be surmised that the successful combination of the VCoI in Second Life, surpassing irrefutable and inherent shortcomings to a future-driven sustainable use and growth.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)[Quantitative Social Research Methods](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)Book

Jan 2007

[Kultar Singh](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)

[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)[Is technology a silver bullet?](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)Article

Jan 1997

[C.A. Twigg](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)

[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)[Expanding a VLE-Based Integration Framework Supporting Education in Second Life](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)Chapter

Oct 2011

[Peter R. Bloomfield](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258053058_The_impact_of_computer_self-efficacy_situational_interest_and_academic_self-concept_in_virtual_communities_of_inquiry_during_the_distance_learning_procedures_through_Second_Life)

Until recently, the use of graphically rich virtual environments was limited to enthusiasts who could afford suitable hardware. However, personal computers are increasingly equipped with powerful graphics hardware as standard, allowing game-like technologies such as Second Life to be adopted by a broad range of users. This has enabled a widespread interest in the use of virtual worlds in education. The research presented in this chapter advances the work which has already been done by the SLOODLE project to provide a general support framework for formal education in virtual worlds. The area of attention is on providing an integration with web-based VLEs (Virtual Learning Environments), which are already in use by many education institutions. The methodology used focuses on issues of software usability, with a view to providing a groundwork for further pedagogical research.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)[Improving the Programming Experience of High School Students by Means of Virtual Worlds](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)Article

[Mariano Rico](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)

[Gonzalo Martínez-Muñoz](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)

[Xavier Alaman](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)

[Estrella Pulido](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289884600_Expanding_a_VLE-Based_Integration_Framework_Supporting_Education_in_Second_Life)

Virtual Worlds have become a very popular kind of software application that has been used in different fields, from games to simulation or education. They allow individuals to interact with others through their avatars and with objects in the environment. Virtual Worlds provide new educational experiences where collaboration and cooperation among users can be easily achieved. This paper presents a novel educational approach based onteacher-student interaction within a virtual environment. This approach has been applied to teaching computer science basics to high-school students. The paper analyses the didactical issues of the created virtual world and the main problems that have been solved in order to develop the operative educational platform. Finally, an evaluation of the covered didactical issues has been carried out. The results of this evaluation show that both teachers and students had a very satisfactory educational experience.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267725008_Improving_the_Programming_Experience_of_High_School_Students_by_Means_of_Virtual_Worlds)[Using Virtual World Platform for Language and Critical Thinking Skills, Learning and Practice](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267725008_Improving_the_Programming_Experience_of_High_School_Students_by_Means_of_Virtual_Worlds)Article

[Tan Chuan Leong](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267725008_Improving_the_Programming_Experience_of_High_School_Students_by_Means_of_Virtual_Worlds)

## Digital natives of today need frequent stimuli and a variety of activities to keep them engaged and connected in the learning process. With the availability of web 2.0 technologies and its impact on the mode of online interaction and networking, they are highly dependable on the informal social media or technologies to make meaning of the world around them and to voice their opinions. The educators of today thus, face the challenge of incorporating informal media or technologies in the formal lesson delivery setting, in order to close the digital divide within, so as to actively engage them. On the other hand, the incorporation of the ICT tools should not be focused on a teacher-centered approach, but more importantly to leverage these affordances to support learner or student-centered practices. Critical thinking, in particular, taking multiple perspectives, is an important component in the teaching of Chinese Language in Singapore. To entice the student to understand, practice and develop multiple perspectives skills in the use of their Mother Tongue language, the classroom setting must include the use of digital media to motivate them and ICT tools that facilitate discussions so that the students are cognitively engaged. Literature on using Virtual World immersive environment for educational purposes have highlighted on the high possibility of implementing learner centered pedagogies to provide a 3-Dimensional (3D), interactive, avatar-based collaborative learning and practice for students. Leveraging on the affordances of the immersive platform, our educational metaverse provided immersive experiences, authentic contexts and activities for experiential learning and role-play for students to practice on their multiple perspectives taking and language skills. This paper will share the core findings on the concept behind the pedagogical and content design, implementation, challenges, adaptations and recommendations for a 3D virtual world environment for language and critical thinking learning and practice in a Singapore secondary schools context.[View](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)Recommended publications

[Discover more](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)Conference Paper

### [Quality of experience of online learning tools](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)

October 2011

[Alexander A. Kist](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)

[Hannah Jolly](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)

[Lyn Brodie](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267301980_Using_Virtual_World_Platform_for_Language_and_Critical_Thinking_Skills_Learning_and_Practice)

Online learning tools have become important components of teaching and course delivery. This paper discusses the issues surrounding research into Quality of Experience (QoE) for online learning tools and how it relates to technical performance, Quality of Service (QoS). The relationship between QoE and QoS for online learning tools is often considered important for describing the optimal ... [Show full abstract] conditions for online learning environments. Such research largely ignores the vital issue of how learners differ from consumers in their use of information and communication technologies such as interactive multimedia environments. The implication of this difference for understanding technology use for learning is presented and the need for an empirical study to address this is argued for. A pilot was undertaken to further define the methodological requirements of conducting a study into the impact of system performance on QoE. The findings of the pilot study describe issues and implications for designing a research methodology which can begin the process of mapping the QoE to QoS relationship for online learning.[Read more](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)Article Full-text available

### [Knowledge Construction Process in Online Learning](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)

January 1970

[Saemah Rahman](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)

[Ruhizan Mohammed Yasin](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)

[Kamaruzaman Jusoff](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)

[...]

[Melor Mohd Yusof](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261364284_Quality_of_experience_of_online_learning_tools)

One of applications in online learning environment is the use of forum or discussion through online communication facilities as a learning activity. This paper focuses on the process of knowledge construction in online discussion designed to be used with mobile technology. The research participants comprised 45 post graduate students enrolled in a research methodology course. These participants ... [Show full abstract] were involved in the online discussion as one of the mode of delivery for the course. Data were collected through open ended questionaire to tap into their perceptions about online learning activity through online discussion. They were also asked to do metacognitive reflections to explain step by step on how do they make conclusion on the meaning of a specific concept from the online discussion. Data were analysed using content analysis as the means of analysis. Result of the study shows majority of respondents agreed that online discussion helps the knowledge construction process through critical examinations of other peoples idea in the discussion. Overcoming psychological barriers is one of the important aspects offered by online environment that facilitate students involvement in constructing knowledge as compared to face to face discussion. Further analysis on the learning process revealed pattern of steps used by the students in constructing the meaning through the discussion process.[View full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268304446_Knowledge_Construction_Process_in_Online_Learning)Article Full-text available

### [Going online to learn health sciences research methods: The student experience](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268304446_Knowledge_Construction_Process_in_Online_Learning)

July 2006  ·  Australasian Journal of Educational Technology

[Lynne Giddings](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268304446_Knowledge_Construction_Process_in_Online_Learning)

[Shirley Campbell](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268304446_Knowledge_Construction_Process_in_Online_Learning)

[Peter Maclaren](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268304446_Knowledge_Construction_Process_in_Online_Learning)

span>Health professionals are attracted to the flexibility of the virtual classroom for their on-going education. Recent studies have documented the differences in pedagogy between Internet based learning online and the traditional classroom setting, but few have investigated student health professionals' transitional process while engaged in online learning. The purpose of this mixed methods ... [Show full abstract] evaluation study was to document students' experience of a six month online research methods paper (unit). Specifically it explores factors that influenced student transition to online pedagogy and successful completion of the paper. Descriptive qualitative and quantitative analyses were applied to 230 student evaluations and 1720 emails collected over a four year period. The findings supported those of previous studies; the main reasons students study online is the flexibility it offers (87%) and the ability to study without taking time off work (72%). The student experiences were captured in the overarching theme 'from enduring to enjoying' . A teacher who works within a collaborative team, engages students early with interactive skill acquisition learning activities, and is responsive to online students' unique needs, can successfully facilitate students through the virtual classroom transitional phases: from 'virtual paralysis' to 'engagement' to 'getting into it' to 'surprised enjoyment'. Without strategies in place, however, teachers risk being overwhelmed by the onslaught of student emails, with the allotted teacher-student contact time slip sliding away.</span[View full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)Chapter Full-text available

### [The Impact of Dynamic Lighting in Classrooms. A Review on Methods](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)

March 2018  ·  Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences

[Ellen Kathrine Hansen](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)

[Stine Louring Nielsen](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)

[Diana Georgieva](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)

[Kathrine Marie Schledermann](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268183214_Going_online_to_learn_health_sciences_research_methods_The_student_experience)

Abstract. In order to understand how research can support lighting designs to improve nurturing environments for learning, a literature review was carried out. The review examined lighting research methods and parameters used for evaluating the effect of dynamic lighting in classrooms. The test parameter gaining most attention in the studies is academic performance; whereas qualitative test ... [Show full abstract] parameters, such as behaviour and mood, are addressed in less than a third of the selected studies. The analysis of these methods leads to a conclusion that learning environments to a broader extent should be studied and designed holistically through a mixed method approach. It is suggested that the potentials of dynamic lighting in learning environments are explored through design driven innovation and the use of mixed methods, in order to be able to put more emphasis on the students’ and teachers’ needs for dynamic lighting scenarios.[View full-text](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323576711_The_Impact_of_Dynamic_Lighting_in_Classrooms_A_Review_on_Methods)Discover the world's research Join ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.[Join for free](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html)**ResearchGate iOS App**[Get it from the App Store now.](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html)[Install](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html)[Keep up with your stats and more](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html)[Access scientific knowledge from anywhere](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html)or[Discover by subject area](https://www.researchgate.net/topics)[Recruit researchers](https://www.researchgate.net/topics)

[Join for free](https://www.researchgate.net/topics)

[Login](https://www.researchgate.net/topics)[Forgot password?](https://www.researchgate.net/topics) Keep me logged in or[Continue with Google](https://www.researchgate.net/connector/google)**Welcome back! Please log in.**[Forgot password?](https://www.researchgate.net/connector/google) Keep me logged in or[Continue with Google](https://www.researchgate.net/connector/google)No account? [Sign up](https://www.researchgate.net/signup.SignUp.html?hdrsu=1&_sg%5B0%5D=vF5GjiW3i_5n4lyyKbKOqgVtiTMHyI76dHyheW8_3y7IUDiI2bbyE11h1zR7dKM8EV8DCCB3IGBYQSoga28sSf2G74Q)

Company[About us](https://www.researchgate.net/about)[News](https://www.researchgate.net/about)[Careers](https://www.researchgate.net/about)Support[Help Center](https://help.researchgate.net/?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=helpcenter)Business solutions[Advertising](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)[Recruiting](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)© 2008-2026 ResearchGate GmbH. All rights reserved.

[Terms](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)

[Privacy](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)

[Copyright](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)

[Imprint](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)

[Consent preferences](https://www.researchgate.net/marketing-solutions?utm_source=researchgate&utm_medium=community-loggedout&utm_campaign=new-footer&utm_content=advertising)